Economic Analysis of Lithium Recovery from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries

University of Tennessee, Knoxville 
TRACE: Tennessee Research and Creative 
Exchange 
Chancellor’s Honors Program Projects Supervised Undergraduate Student Research and Creative Work 
5-2020 
Economic Analysis of Lithium Recovery from Spent Lithium Ion 
Batteries 
Makayla Hyde 
mhyde6@vols.utk.edu 
Jaclyn Choate 
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Jchoate@vols.utk.edu 
Zoe Antonas 
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, zantonas@vols.utk.edu 
Abby Newberry 
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, anewber4@vols.utk.edu 
Madi Sherrod 
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, msherro4@vols.utk.edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_chanhonoproj 
Recommended Citation 
Hyde, Makayla; Choate, Jaclyn; Antonas, Zoe; Newberry, Abby; and Sherrod, Madi, "Economic Analysis of 
Lithium Recovery from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries" (2020). Chancellor’s Honors Program Projects. 
https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_chanhonoproj/2390 
This Dissertation/Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by the Supervised Undergraduate Student 
Research and Creative Work at TRACE: Tennessee Research and Creative Exchange. It has been accepted for 
inclusion in Chancellor’s Honors Program Projects by an authorized administrator of TRACE: Tennessee Research 
and Creative Exchange. For more information, please contact trace@utk.edu. 
0 
April 27, 2020 
 
 Dr. Robert Counce 
CBE 488  
University of Tennessee  
 
 
 
Dear Dr. Counce:  
We are submitting the attached report entitled ​Economic Analysis of Lithium Recovery from Spent 
Lithium Ion Batteries​.  
 
This report examines the results of designing a process and estimating the capital and 
manufacturing costs for the recovery of lithium from spent lithium ion batteries.  
 
I hope you find this report satisfactory.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Zoe Antonas, Makayla Hyde, Jaclyn Choate, Abby Newberry, and Madi Sherrod 
Group 9 
 
 
Honors Design in Green Engineering  
University of Tennessee  
Knoxville, Tennessee  
 
Enclosure: Final Report  
 
cc:  
 
1 
 Economic Analysis of Lithium Recovery 
from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries 
 
 
CBE 488: Honors Senior Design 
Team Members: Zoe Antonas, Jaclyn Choate, Makayla Hyde,  
Abby Newberry, and Madi Sherrod 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted: April 27, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Department 
University of Tennessee 
 Nathan W. Dougherty Engineering Building 
 
1512 Middle Drive, Knoxville, TN 37916  
2 
Abstract 
Due to rapid demand for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) with new hybrid and electric vehicles along 
with modern day technologies like cell phones and computers, the supply of natural 
lithium-containing reserves is draining. This envisioned process could help alleviate the resource 
shortage and decrease the potential of environmental pollution due to improper waste disposal. The 
recovery of lithium hydroxide is accomplished by processing spent LIBs. The LIBs will be 
shredded and screened based on desirable size; this will allow separation of the different 
components of the spent LIB. The main components of spent LIB will be classified as the cathodic 
or anodic material. Other components of spent LIB like the binder and separator will be discharged 
as waste in the pretreatment step of the process. The spent LIBs will be acid leached with nitric acid 
and neutralized with sodium hydroxide. The last step of the process will be recovery which will 
purify the product and byproducts being sold. The main streams with byproducts and products that 
will be sold are from the final filtration step.  Based on results of this study, the process is found to 
be not only economically feasible but profitable. The maximum profit was found to be around $38 
million, and will remain profitable even after including the yearly equipment and operating costs.  
3 
Table of Contents 
1.0 Introduction 5 
Table 1: Average Composition of LIBs 5 
2.0 Synthesis Information of Processes 6 
2.1 Overall Process Design 6 
Figure 1 6 
2.2 Process Chemistry 7 
2.3 Literature Review 8 
2.4 Basic Process Economics 10 
Table 2: Cost of Raw Materials (2019) 10 
Table 3: Price of Products and Byproducts (2019) 11 
3.0 Method of Approach 11 
4.0 Results 12 
Figure 2 12 
Figure 3 13 
4.1 Optimization 13 
4.2 Process Flow Diagram 13 
Figure 4 14 
Table 4: Mass Flow Rate Information by Streams 14 
4.3 Safety, Health, and Environment Analysis 15 
Table 5: Hazard Chart for All Compounds Throughout the Process 15 
4.4 Capital Cost Estimates 16 
Table 6: Design Parameters and Cost of Process Equipment 16 
Figure 5 16 
4.5 Manufacturing Cost Estimates 17 
Table 7: Manufacturing Costs for Designed Process 17 
Figure 6 18 
5.0 Discussion of Results 19 
Figure 7 19 
5.1 Future Process Optimization 19 
6.0 Conclusions 20 
7.0 Recommendations 21 
8.0 References 22 
 
4 
Appendices 23 
Appendix A: Project Assumptions 23 
Table A.1: Assumptions Made Throughout the Process 23 
Appendix B: Sample Calculations 24 
B.1 Economic Potentials 24 
B.2 Costing for Equipment 24 
B.3 Operating Cost 26 
Table B.3.1: Number of Operators for Each Type of Equipment 28 
 
5 
1.0 Introduction 
The purpose of this report is to document the results of a study to design an industrial-sized process 
to recover lithium and other valuable components from lithium ion batteries (LIBs) so that these 
materials may be recycled. The economics of the created process will be analyzed and documented. 
 
Due to rapid demand for LIBs with new hybrid and electric vehicles along with modern day 
technologies like cell phones and computers, the supply of natural lithium-containing reserves is 
draining. Additionally, lithium is very reactive and therefore difficult to dispose of. These problems 
support the need for this study. This envisioned process could help alleviate the resource shortage 
and decrease the potential of environmental pollution due to improper waste disposal. 
 
The spent LIBs are assumed to be of cylindrical shape with an iron or aluminum can body (Liu et 
al., 2019). The design objectives for this report and process are as follows: accurately provide 
economic analysis for a study-level design which will be approximately +30 to -20% of projected 
costs, and design a process that supports a feed of 1000 kg of spent lithium batteries per hour with 
the composition shown in Table 1. The process is designed to be safe and environmentally friendly 
while producing products that are economically feasible. ​This report will use a late 2019 chemical 
engineering index value of 599.5 ​when referring to any economic potentials. 
Table 1: Average Composition of LIBs 
Component Weight Percent (%) 
 ​LiCoO​2 27.5  
Nickel Alloy (80% Nii, 20% Cr) 24.5 
Copper Alloy (85% Cu, 15% Zr) 14.5 
Carbon 16 
Electrolyte 3.5 
Polymer Casing 14 
[Lee and Rhee, 2002] 
 
The recovery process is based on a process presented in Castillo et al. 2002. The process consists of 
isolating the cathode elements of the LIBs and selectively dissolving the materials in dilute nitric 
acid. These metals are then selectively precipitated to obtain the final product of separate lithium 
compounds. This choice of process is based on a review of literature presented later in this report. 
This process is sponsored by JSW Fund for Undergraduate and Graduate Research at the University 
of Tennessee. 
6 
2.0 Synthesis Information of Processes 
2.1 Overall Process Design 
The recovery of lithium hydroxide is accomplished by processing spent LIBs. Throughout the 
process there will be many streams so that the lithium product will be the most pure. The main 
streams with byproducts and products that will be sold are from the final filtration step. Figure 1 
shows the general process flow diagram and begins with pretreatment of LIBs so that most of the 
waste from the battery will be removed. Pretreatment will include heating the LIBs to remove the 
polymer casing and also shredding to remove other metal components. The polymer waste will be 
disposed and the desired material will be sent on for further processes. The next step in the process 
will include acid leaching with nitric acid. The last step of the process will be recovery which will 
purify the product and byproducts being sold. This step will include an addition of sodium 
hydroxide which will be filtered to separate solid compounds from the liquid filtrate.  
 
 
      Figure 1 
 
 
The proposed process does have constraints that must be met in order to design a safe environment 
for workers. Before processing, the spent LIBs have to be discharged to prevent short-circuiting and 
7 
self-ignition which could lead to an explosion. To discharge the spent LIBs, normally a 
salt-saturated solution is used. If heat is produced while shredding the batteries, refrigeration during 
the operation might be required.  Another constraint on the overall efficiency of the process is in the 
problem of readily available machinery that could be used to separate the different components of 
LIBs. Optimal machinery may require custom design. Due to the cost of machinery, this optimal 
separation may be difficult to obtain. 
2.2 Process Chemistry 
The LIBs will be shredded and screened based on desirable size; this will allow separation of the 
different components of the spent LIB. The main components of spent LIB will be classified as the 
cathodic or anodic material. Other components of spent LIB like the binder and separator will be 
discharged as waste in the pretreatment step of the process. This classification is based on two 
reactions that occur inside the cell of the battery; the cathodic and anodic reactions shown in 
equations (1) and (2) respectively. Equation (3) represents the movement of lithium ions from 
cathode to anode inside the battery cell.  
 
        (aq)  C(s)  ⇆ LiCLi+ + 6 + e− 6  (1) 
 
oO  (s) Li  (aq) ⇆ LiCoOC 2 +  
+ + e− 2 (2) 
 
          iCoO  ⇆ CoOL 2 2 + Li
+ + e−  (3) 
 
When the screening has removed undesired waste material, desired material will then be sent to the 
acid leaching step of the process. This step is shown in equation (4), demonstrating the reaction of 
lithium components present in spent LIBs with nitric acid.  
 
HNO iCoO (s) iNO o(NO ) H O O (g)3 3 + L 2 → L 3 + C 3 2 + 2
3
2 + 4
1
2 (4) 
 
Once in solution, metals can be recovered by chemical precipitation by altering the pH of the 
solution. The recovery step will add NaOH to raise the pH to better purify the products.  The caustic 
soda will bind to a metallic ion and precipitate that metal from the solution. Once the pH is raised, 
the metal compound, in this case cobalt hydroxide, will drop out of solution and be able to be 
separated by filtration. This reaction is shown in equation (5) below. NaOH is a strong base, and in 
an industrial scale process these steps can be controlled by using a pH sensor.  
 
o(NO )  NaOH o(OH)  (s)  NaNOC 3 2 + 2 → C 2 + 2 3 (5) 
 
8 
2.3 Literature Review 
[1]​ Advances in the recovery of spent lithium battery compounds [Castillo et al.] 
Various initial solubility compositions were compared to see how valorization may increase 
potential profits and reduce the environmental impact in comparison to the current recycling 
processes for spent LIBs. The initial battery cell components were identified using flame 
spectroscopy, and the contents were tracked over each process run. The batteries were dissolved in 
an acidic solution, then the resulting metal components were selectively precipitated into a hydroxyl 
form and removed from the solution as a byproduct. It was found that the best extraction of 
precipitate at 100% nickel, and a filtrate composed of 100% lithium and manganese occurs at an 
initial pH of 2.9 with a scale rate of 10 volume percent of NaOH added to the solution for 
calcination and secondary extraction. This reaction does not include organic solutes, which ensures 
that the environmental impact was minimized as much as possible. When comparing the acid 
solution, the lithium was found to dissolve best in nitric acid over hydrochloric acid in a two molar 
solution. The second reaction and filtration occurred by adding a base in the form of sodium 
hydroxide to raise the overall pH to 5.2 and precipitate out the rest of the metal impurities such as 
iron that is present. If the pH was allowed to increase to 10, then the manganese hydroxide will also 
precipitate out in a third reaction, which means only lithium ions will remain in the solution to be 
removed efficiently and separated into a filtrate to be collected. Valorization involves the extra step 
of sending manganese and metal byproducts from the first separation to a muffler furnace to be 
heated into a steel alloy at 500°C. This steel can then be sold to increase profits from the reaction, 
and remove heavy metal waste that can become a potential pollutant. Overall, valorization appears 
to be a reasonable avenue to take in processing the byproducts for both economical and ecological 
reasons. 
 
[2] ​Preparation of LiCoO​2​ from spent lithium-ion batteries  [Lee et al.] 
This paper explains a lab-scale LIB recycling process. There is an in-depth discussion of the 
heating process and reductive leaching. Both nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide were examined as 
reducing agents at different solid:liquid ratios, acid concentrations, temperatures and times. Optimal 
leaching conditions were determined for the lab scale process as 1M nitric acid at 75°C with a later 
addition of hydrogen peroxide. Conclusions drawn about the lab scale process include the benefits 
of shredding and results of leaching trials. 
 
[3] ​Recycling of Spent Lithium-ion Batteries in View of Lithium Recovery: A Critical Review  [Liu 
et al.] 
This review starts by explaining how hybrid vehicles and portable electronic devices have 
caused greater demand for more lithium ion batteries. Not only is this demand creating a shortage of 
lithium in the world, but the disposal of these batteries are causing environmental and human health 
hazards. As a result, recycling lithium from these batteries is a major process that needs to be 
designed and implemented in the near future. Liu et al calls for a mild recycling process that takes 
9 
both of the good steps in the hydrometallurgy-dominant method and the pyrometallurgy-dominant 
method. This mild recycling method utilizes the advantages of both methods by avoiding strong 
acids and reducing temperatures. The review then explains in detail how both hydrometallurgy and 
pyrometallurgy processes work and even looks at what current industrial recycling is doing to 
recycle lithium. The author ends by explaining that the mild recycling process is the better process 
because it decreases energy consumption and avoids the application of acid. 
 
[4] ​Electrode Materials for Lithium Ion Batteries: A Review [Heidari et al.] 
This review explains the evolution of battery technology and the recent development of 
LIBs. It begins with an overview of past developments in battery technology as well as newer 
concepts and materials used for the optimization of a battery. Going into details regarding LIBs, the 
paper gives insight into recent trends and prospects of anode and cathode materials for optimum 
battery technology as well as an economic perspective for the production of the battery. Finally, the 
paper concludes with future prospects of LIBs and how more research must be done in order to 
adapt a sustainable, economically efficient battery for global use.  
 
[5] ​A Review of Processes and Technologies for the Recycling of Lithium-Ion Batteries [Xu et al.]  
This paper reviews current endeavors into the recycling of spent LIBs. Constraints are laid 
out, and two main processes are discussed: physical and chemical recycling. Physical processes 
discussed include cutting/grinding, thermal treatment, magnetic separation, and dissolution. 
Chemical processes include acid leaching, bio-leaching, solvent extraction, and chemical 
precipitation. Next, the feasibility of re-using the recycled LiCoO​2​ was explored. Xu et al. 
determined that a combination of both physical and chemical recycling processes results in optimal 
recovery. Nine different combination recycling processes were explained with varying levels of 
detail. The paper ends by explaining that a practical recycling technology will both recover the 
useful metal resources as well as safely and sustainably dispose of harmful chemicals present in the 
battery such as electrode material and LIB polymer casing. 
 
[6] ​Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Battery: A Critical Review [Zeng et al.] 
This paper looks at each experiment that is tested in the past papers and compares and 
contrasts the results with respect to efficiency of lithium being recycled from LIBs. After explaining 
what batteries are and how important they are to today’s society, Zeng et al. further explain the 
exact parts of a battery and the composition of each part. The major parts of the battery include the 
cathode, anode, separator, and a binder.  It compares and contrasts the different compositions of 
batteries and which type of battery each experiment used. The paper explains that a general process 
is used to recycle lithium starting with pretreatment to secondary treatment and ending with deep 
recovery, looking at the differences in each step that may result in better or worse lithium recovery. 
 
 
 
10 
[7] ​Leaching Study of Spent Li-ion Batteries [Wang et al.] 
This paper studies the leaching of LIBs under varying conditions. The effects of hydronium 
ion concentration, liquid-to-solid ratio, temperature, and time were investigated to better understand 
the leaching trends within the system. Wang et al. determined that the best operating conditions for 
leaching LIBs are 3 mol/L sulfuric acid, a 15:1 ratio of liquid-to-solid, a 0.25 mol/L concentration 
of sodium thiosulfate, a temperature of 90​°C​, and a reaction time of 3 hours. The paper briefly 
mentioned the reasoning behind choosing sulfuric acid but did not go into detail. 
 
[8] ​A Critical Review and Analysis on the Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries  [Weiguang et 
al.] 
This paper begins with an overview of what makes up a battery and how LIBs were 
developed. Next, the economical and environmental trade-offs are examined for the following 
processes: pre-treatment method pyro- and hydrometallurgical processes, traditional leaching, 
solvent extraction, and leaching resynthesis. Three current LIB recycling processes are discussed in 
terms of pros and cons. Ultimately, the paper summarizes that these processes have not been able to 
break even on an industrial scale, although they are getting closer. Additionally, the leaching 
process is not yet completely understood as to which chemicals are the most effective. Finally, more 
research into the energy use of these recycling processes must be done to best understand the cost of 
an LIB recycling process. 
2.4 Basic Process Economics 
In this study, the main goal was to analyze the most economical and effective way to recover 
lithium from spent LIBs. Many different process steps were examined from each paper that are 
summarized in the literature review above. The variables in the economic analysis included overall 
percent of lithium recovered, the individual equipment cost, and the purity of sellable byproducts. 
The cost information for raw materials and the price for products and byproducts are shown below 
in Table 2 and Table 3 respectively. Cost information for each individual component will be found 
in the textbook ​Chemical Engineering Process Design and Economics​ by Ulrich and Vasudevan 
[9]. 
Table 2: Cost of Raw Materials (2019) 
Material Cost/unit 
Spent Lithium-ion Batteries $1/kg 
Nitric Acid $300/metric ton 
Sodium Hydroxide $450/metric ton 
Electricity/Fuel $4/GJ 
32 barg steam $4/GJ  
11 
 
 
Table 3: Price of Products and Byproducts (2019) 
Material Cost/unit 
Lithium Hydroxide $25,500/metric ton 
Cobalt Hydroxide $400/metric ton 
Sodium Nitrate $0.70/kg 
Aluminum $2,000/metric ton 
Copper $6,300/metric ton 
Cobalt $3,500/metric ton 
Iron $100/metric ton 
Chromium $9,400/metric ton 
Zinc $2.55/kg 
Nickel $13.90/kg 
 
3.0 Method of Approach 
First, the feed of spent LIBs will be pretreated by being heated in a kiln and then sent to a grinder. 
The shredded pieces of LIBs will be screened based on desirable size, and the undesirable pieces 
will be either sold as a mixture of metals or screened based on size to separate the metals. The 
liquid polymer that comes off from heating the LIBs will be disposed of as waste. Then desirable 
size pieces will be sent to a mixing tank where nitric acid will be added to dissociate ions. This 
mixture will be filtered out into two streams: a solid residue composed of anodic components such 
as copper and carbon powder and liquid filtrate made up of lithium and cobalt. This filtrate will be 
sent to a mixing tank where sodium hydroxide is added to raise the pH and reduce lithium. The 
sodium hydroxide will also bind to cobalt ions and cause them to fall out of solution. The solution 
will be filtered so that cobalt hydroxide will be the solid residue and the lithium hydroxide will still 
be in the filtrate.  The pH will be raised to around 10.  Then the cobalt hydroxide compound will 
drop out of solution. The filtration will separate liquid lithium oxide, a stable form of the lithium, 
from solid cobalt hydroxide. 
12 
4.0 Results 
All data was taken from OLI:Flowsheets and was further analyzed to see if the process was 
profitable or at least economically feasible. All operating conditions are manually set into 
OLI:Flowsheets so the simulation could provide the most accurate data specifically for this process. 
Final outlet streams were multiplied by their respective sell prices given in Table 3. All profit from 
products were discounted by 50% due to being mixed streams instead of completely pure separate 
product streams. Product and byproduct revenue for the process is shown below in Figure 2, which 
indicates which products or byproducts sell for the greatest profit. 
 
 
Figure 2 
 
With a 100% recovery rate and selling all products for profit, the maximum profit was found to be 
$38,505,232. This profit margin did not include yearly equipment cost or operating cost. $38 
million could be made solely based on product profit minus the cost of raw material. The level one 
economic potential is found by subtracting the cost of input compounds from the profit of output 
compounds, based on equation (1) in Appendix B. These prices are shown in Figure 3 and plotted 
based on varying amounts of product recovery.  
 
13 
 
Figure 3 
4.1 Optimization 
This process was designed using our best engineering judgement, and optimization is therefore 
inherently built into the scaled-up design. For example, lab scale reviews shown in section 2.3 used 
three reactors and three filters to successfully raise the pH of the reactor throughput. As the process 
was scaled up, only two reactors and two filters were necessary to raise the pH to the desired level. 
Additionally, in this process the polymer casing is melted off right away. This allows the following 
unit operations to be performed at a lower temperature. 
4.2 Process Flow Diagram 
The flow diagram shown in Figure 4 starts after the spent LIBs have been heated and shredded, 
ensuring that no polymer casing and electrolyte in this part of the process. A thousand kilograms of 
liquid nitric acid are added to the spent LIB in a continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR). The 
products of this reactor are then filtered to retain a liquid filtrate that contains both the lithium and 
cobalt compounds. The solid residue will contain nickel, copper, chromium, and zinc and these will 
be sold as mixed byproduct. The liquid filtrate stream named Liquid Filtration 1 will be neutralized 
with 800 kg of sodium hydroxide in a second CSTR.  The products of this reactor called Solid 
Residue, are then filtered to obtain a product stream and byproduct stream. The product stream 
named Lithium Hydroxide will contain about 100 kg of liquid lithium hydroxide with some 
impurities. The byproduct stream named Cobalt Hydroxide will contain around 260 kg of cobalt 
hydroxide as a solid byproduct also with some impurities. 
14 
 
Figure 4 
 
Total mass flow rates with a material balance is shown below in Table 4. Each stream name is the 
same as the stream name in Figure 4. Values below 10​-4​ of components in each stream were not 
included in the table below.  
Table 4: Mass Flow Rate Information by Streams  
 
 
 
 
15 
4.3 Safety, Health, and Environment Analysis 
All design aspects of this plant were made while considering sustainability and environmental 
impact. As long as LIBs are being used, there will always be a supply of spent LIBs for the plant. If 
LIBs stay just as popular or become even more popular, this plant will be needed to recover the 
lithium because it is becoming a scarce resource. The process does produce one waste stream of 
polymer casing but the hope is that all of the other filtration streams will produce sellable 
byproducts. Since the polymer casing and undesirable metal shavings waste does not contain 
lithium, this will not have an environmental impact when disposing of the waste.  
 
Another major consideration in the design of the plant was worker safety. Throughout the whole 
process, lithium is the largest safety concern involved in the process due to its hazardous qualities. 
Lithium batteries can present fire or explosion hazards. Lithium is also reactive with water so an 
inert gas in a commercial glove box will be used when reaction with water vapor is a concern. Dry 
air requirements will be met by having good vapor barriers in walls, floor, and ceiling. All 
equipment will be grounded, and there will be no sprinkler system that could introduce water into 
the dry room. Because of the arid condition of a dry room, worker safety will be monitored 
intensely. Personal protective equipment (PPE) will be worn at all times to account for exposure to 
dry powder.  
 
The identified safety hazards and proper operating conditions are found and recorded in Table 5 as a 
Materials Safety Data Sheet (MSDS). It is highly recommended that operators wear corrosive 
resistant coverings when dealing with HNO₃, LiOH, and Co(OH)₂. Respirators may be required 
when dealing with the raw materials and dust created by grinding the LIBs to ensure that particles 
do not affect the operators’ respiratory systems, as they are all considered high irritants, and some 
raw materials may pose as mutagenic threats.  
Table 5: Hazard Chart for All Compounds Throughout the Process 
 
16 
4.4 Capital Cost Estimates 
Capital cost estimates were done for each piece of equipment necessary to the process. Sizing for 
each piece of equipment is shown in Table 6 and sample calculations are shown in Appendix B. 
Table 6: Design Parameters and Cost of Process Equipment  
 
 
In Figure 5, the total cost of equipment is shown and broken down by each piece of equipment. 
 
 
Figure 5 
 
 
 
 
17 
4.5 Manufacturing Cost Estimates 
For our purposes, manufacturing costs, shown in Table 7, are inclusive of operating costs, but 
operating costs, shown in Figure 6, only encompass the operating labor and utilities cost. Equipment 
cost estimates were done for each piece of equipment that required some kind of utilities to run the 
process. Utility requirements for each piece of equipment were found; sample calculations are 
shown in Appendix B [9].  
Table 7: Manufacturing Costs for Designed Process  
 
 
In Figure 6, the total operating costs are shown and broken down by each piece of equipment. The 
kiln, grinder and conveyor belt were grouped together because of their placement in this process. 
For the agitators, kiln, grinder, and conveyor belt, the only required utility cost was electricity (more 
details shown in Appendix B). The reactor utility cost included the steam needed to heat the 
18 
jacketed CSTR. Thirty-two barg of steam was used to get the reactor at 75 and maintain this℃  
temperature. Operator cost was found using the operating factor of each piece of equipment and 
added together for all equipment [9]. 
 
 
Figure 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
5.0 Discussion of Results 
To get a better feel for the economic feasibility of the process, the second economic potential was 
taken. This level two analysis includes annual equipment cost along with operating cost and is 
shown in Figure 7. With a payback period of seven years for equipment, a max profit of the process 
was found to be $35,553,591. The yearly equipment cost was $254,502 and the yearly operating 
cost was $2,696,138. Economic potential two was found based on equation (2) from Appendix B.  
 
 
Figure 7 
 
After a thorough evaluation of cost estimates, below is a discussion of potential optimization 
measures that could be taken in order to save money or produce a more efficient system. Through 
the equipment evaluation and costing steps of the process, other potential options were weighed, but 
what was thought to be the most plausible was chosen. Because there were a multitude of options 
for the process, such as types of equipment used or sizes of equipment, a discussion of optimization 
is necessary for future manipulations of the system. 
5.1 Future Process Optimization 
The rotary kiln was chosen as the most robust option to heat the LIB process feed. As seen in Figure 
6, it is the most expensive unit operation, making up over 75% of the equipment expenses. More 
research should be done into other heating options that could reduce this high expense while still 
sufficiently heating the feed stream. 
 
20 
To design the grinder, a rotary cutter was chosen based on the assumed desired particle size of 
LIBs. Testing with a grinder design company would be useful to learn more about the average 
shredding size of LIBs. This information would help to choose the desirable size of shredded pieces 
as well as design the grinder to better suit our specific process needs.  
 
The distance of the conveyor belt from the kiln to the grinder was assumed to be 7 meters. The true 
distance will depend on the temperature of the LIBs coming out of the grinder. The LIBs will need 
to cool to a temperature suitable for safety to enter the grinder. The conveyor belt length should be 
long enough to give the LIBs a chance to cool off if necessary. Testing on a kiln would need to be 
done to determine the actual temperature of LIBs leaving the kiln to decide on the exact length of 
the conveyor belt. 
 
When sizing the CSTRs, stainless steel was used for both reactors due to the presence of nitric acid. 
Carbon steel is a lower cost material but is not suitable for the corrosivity level of nitric acid. 
Reactor-2 does not have any nitric acid feeds, but stainless steel was chosen in case trace amounts 
of acid were present in the process stream. Tests should be run in a pilot plant to determine if the 
nitric acid is present in trace amounts or if it is all neutralized. If neutralized, the material of 
Reactor-2 could be changed to carbon steel. This would allow for a cost savings of $59,000.  
 
Both filters were priced using stainless steel for the same reason. Pilot plant tests should also be 
done on the filters to determine if nitric acid is present. If the acid is neutralized, Filter-2 could be 
priced with carbon steel to save $1,100. Additionally, simple filters were chosen for the process. 
Simple filters require more hands-on maintenance. Upgrading both filters from simple to automated 
would allow for easier operation and better yields for a cost of $13,400. Tests would need to be 
done to determine the difference in yield to decide if this upgrade is cost-effective.  
6.0 Conclusions  
Based on results of economic potential two shown in Figure 7, the process is found to be not only 
economically feasible but profitable. The maximum profit was found to be around $38 million, and 
will remain profitable even after including the yearly equipment and operating cost. With further 
analysis done in Table 7, the after-tax rate of return was found to be 893%. This analysis looks at 
not only the equipment and operating cost but also the indirect manufacturing cost along with 
general expenses and depreciation. This gives a better feel of all the expenses that will come with 
running this process. Table 7 goes further than just the cost to pay operators and includes 
administration and supervisor cost. Operating costs are expanded to include maintenance, repairs, 
and operating supplies. This more in depth analysis shows that the process would be economically 
feasible and could be extremely profitable. Since this is a study-level analysis for this process, the 
after-tax rate of return does have some error and will decrease with further research.  
 
21 
7.0 Recommendations 
With further research, a more precise analysis can be made about the process’s profitability. As 
discussed above in section 5.1, lab testing and a pilot plant run could be needed to obtain more 
accurate data. Testing can provide more accurate results than a computer simulation, and can be 
used to size and cost equipment to better fit the needs of the process. Data from a specific supplier 
of spent LIBs is necessary so a better assumption of LIB composition can be determined. Once 
composition is known, testing on the specific melting temperatures of the LIBs needs to be done to 
know exactly what kind of heating equipment would be best. The kiln that was sized for this 
process might be too hot for a specific composition of spent LIBs. If a different piece of equipment 
is used instead of a rotary kiln, this could greatly affect the profitability of the process. Testing with 
a grinder design company would help determine the size of grinded LIBs. This data would allow for 
more precise calculations for solvent flow rates and  resident time for each reactor.  
 
With more data, the process can be better laid out within a plant. With more precise equipment 
sizes, piping and pumps can be added to equipment cost. This will decrease the after-tax rate of 
return by increasing the capital investment. After more testing is done at a higher analysis level, a 
more accurate rate of return will decide if the process is truly profitable or not.  
 
With a more precise analysis, the process itself does have room for improvement. The first 
recommendation on how to improve revenue would be to look at separating the product streams. 
According to Figure 2, lithium hydroxide generates the most revenue, but since it is part of a mixed 
product stream, the process only generates half the possible profit from lithium hydroxide. Since all 
product streams were mixed and were therefore discounted by 50%, this leaves room for 
improvement. With separate product streams, the revenue could be doubled. Before doubling the 
revenue, a method to separate the products in each stream must be studied for feasibility and 
practicality. This separation process may not be possible or economically feasible. The second 
recommendation would be to look at where recycling streams could be implemented throughout the 
process. These streams could help supply solvents back into the system and reduce the cost of 
continually buying new solvents.   
22 
8.0 References 
1. Liu, C., J. Lin H. Cao, Y. Zhang, Z. Sun, “Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries in View 
of Lithium Recovery: A Critical Review,” ​J. of Cleaner Production 228​, 801-813 (2019). 
2. Lee, C.K., and K.-I. Rhee, “Preparation of LiCoO​2​ from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries,” ​J. of 
Power Sources 109​. 17-21 (2002). 
3. Castillo, S., F. Ansart, C. Laberty-Robert, J. Portal, “Advances in the Recovering of Spent 
Lithium Battery Compounds,” ​J. of Power Sources 112​. 247-254  (2002). 
4. Heidari, K.H., A. Kamyabi-Gol, M.H. Sohi, A. Ataie, Electrode Materials for Lithium Ion 
Batteries: A review,” ​J. of Ultrafine Grained and Nanostructured Materials, 51​(1), 1-12, 
(2018). 
5. Xu, J., H.R. Thomas, R.W. Francis, K.R. Lum, J. Wang, B. Liang, “Review of Processes 
and Technologies for the Recycling of Lithium-Ion Batteries,”  ​J. of Power Sources 177​, 
512-527 (2008). 
6. Zeng, Z., J. Li, N. Singh, “Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Battery: A Critical Review”, 
Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, 44​(10) 1129 - 1165 (2014). 
7. Wang, J., M. Chen, H. Chen, T. Luo,  Z. Xu, “Leaching Study of Spent Li-Ion Batteries,” 
Procedia Environmental Sciences​. (2012). 
8. Weiguang, L., Z. Wang, H. Cao, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, Z. Sun, “A Critical Review and Analysis 
on the Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries,” ​ACS Sustainable Chemistry & 
Engineering 6​ (2) 1504 - 1521, (2018). 
9. Ulrich, G. D., Vasudevan, P. T., & Ulrich, G. D., “Chemical Engineering Process Design 
and Economics: A Practical Guide.” ​Durham, N.H: Process Pub.​ (2004). 
10. Meng-Meng, W., Cong-Cong, Z., Fu-Shen, Z., “Recycling of Spent Lithium-ion battery 
with polyvinyl chloride by mechanochemical process,” ​Waste Management, 67​ 232-239 
(2017). 
  
23 
Appendices  
Appendix A: Project Assumptions 
Table A.1: Assumptions Made Throughout the Process 
Category Assumption Value 
Process Process is continuous   
 Reaction time of both reactors 3 hrs 
Feed All batteries are cylindrical   
 All batteries have a constant 
composition to create mass 
balances 
 
Equipment Sizing Slurry viscosity  Slurry viscosity assumed to be 
the same as the solvent 
 Reactor Size Each reactor should be filled 
⅔ full of reactants 
 Belt Length Total 10m including section 
into and out of kiln 
 Kiln length to diameter ratio L/D=15 
 Basic piping costs are 
included in the bare module 
price of equipment  
No extra cost was accounted 
for piping in this process 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
Appendix B: Sample Calculations 
B.1 Economic Potentials  
alue of  P roducts V alue of  Byproducts ost of  ReactantsEP 1 = V +  − C (1) 
 
nnualized Equipment Cost perating Cost of  EquipmentEP 2 = EP 1 − A − O (2) 
 
B.2 Costing for Equipment 
All equipment cost was found using the Chemical Engineering Process Design and Economics: a 
Practical Guide textbook [9]. 
 
Cost of Rotary Kiln 
Table 4.10 was used for preliminary equipment selection. Based on thermal efficiency, electrical 
power requirements, and angle of incline, a rotary kiln was chosen. To find the kiln cost, the 
internal volume had to be sized first. Assuming a length-diameter ratio of 15, a diameter of 1.7 m 
and a length of 25 m was found. With these measurements the volume was found to be 56.75 m​3​. 
Using Figure 5.33 for rotary and vertical tower gas-solid contactors, the purchased equipment cost 
in 2004 dollars was found to be around $210,000. Converting this to 2019 dollars, the purchased 
equipment cost was found to be $315,000. To find the bare module cost, = 3.75 was used for aF BM  
carbon steel rotary kiln. 
 C  BM = Cp × F BM  (3) 
$315,000 3.75 = $1,181,250CBM = ×  
 
Cost of Conveyor Belt 
A conveyor belt was sized for moving material into and out of the rotary kiln. Ten meters in total 
distance was assumed with 3 m of belt leading up to the kiln and 7 m of belt coming out of the kiln, 
moving material into the grinder. Table 4.4 was used for preliminary equipment selection. Based on 
criteria, an auger belt with a 0.3 m auger diameter was chosen.  Using Figure 5.14 for apron, auger 
belt and bucket conveyors, the purchase equipment cost in 2004 dollars was found to be around 
$5,000. Converting to 2019 dollars the equipment cost was found to be $7,500. Bare module cost 
using = 2.2  was used for an auger. Using equation (3) bare module cost was found to be:F BM  
 
$7,500 2.2 = $16,500CBM = ×  
 
Cost of Grinder 
To grind the spent LIBs that are coming out of the rotary kiln, a rotary cutter was chosen based on 
maximum feed diameter, maximum capacity and size of crushing which were described in Table 
25 
4.5a. With a feed rate of 0.185 of spent heated LIBs, a purchased equipment cost in 2004 dollarss
kg  
was found to be around $6,900 from Fig 5.17. Converting to 2019 dollars, the purchased equipment 
cost was around $10,350. Using a = 2.1 for rotary cutter and equation (3), a bare module costF BM  
in 2019 dollars was found to be: 
$10,350 2.1 = $21,735CBM = ×  
 
Sample Cost of first CSTR Reactor (including agitators) 
To determine reactor cost, the reactor first had to be sized. Assuming ideal mixing and additive 
volume, volumetric flow rate was found using OLI:flowsheets. 
 
V  (volumetric f low rate)T = V Spent LIBs + V nitric acid (4) 
= 1.85.1837 .66162 V T = 1 hr
m3 + 0 hr
m3
hr
m3  
 
Once total volumetric flow rate was found, the volume of solution that filled the reactor was found 
based on the space time. For both reactors, we assumed a space time of 3 hrs ( ). To find theτ = 3  
total reactor volume, the reactor was assumed to be ⅔ full. 
 
V solution = V T × τ (5) 
= 5.54 hrV .85solution = 1 hr
m3
 × 3 m
3  
×V reactor = 3
4 V solution  
.54 m .39 m  V reactor = 3
4 × 5 3 = 7 3  
 
Using Figure 5.23 for a jacketed vessel the purchased equipment cost in 2004 was found to be 
around $12,000.  Converting this to 2019 dollars, the purchased equipment cost of the vessel is 
$18,000. To find bare module cost , =1 for pressure less than 5 barg and )(CBM ,vessel F p F BM ,vessel
=7.5 for stainless steel were used with equation (6).  
 
CBM ,vessel = CP ,vessel × F BM ,vessel × F P  (6) 
=$18,000CBM ,vessel .5 135, 00× 7 × 1 = $ 0  
 
To decide the agitator size, the power consumption was needed. Table 4.16 gave equation (7) which 
defines power consumption for a mechanically-aided agitated axial turbine with a given reactor 
volume.  
.95 kWP = V 0.8 = 7.390.8 = 4  
 
With power consumption, purchased equipment cost in 2004 dollars was found to be $7,500 from 
Figure 5.42. Converting to 2019 dollars, the purchased equipment cost was $11,250. Using equation 
(3) and an  for stainless steel agitators, a bare module cost in 2019 dollars was found to.5F BM = 2  
be: 
26 
11, 50 .5 28, 25CBM = $ 2 × 2 = $ 1  
   
Sample Cost of First Filter 
Table 4.23b was used for preliminary equipment selection. Based on liquid being the continuous 
phase, diameter of particles, and area needed, a simple cartridge filter was chosen. To find the filter 
cost, the nominal filter area had to be sized first. Using equation (7) from Table 4.23b, nominal area 
could be found using the liquid flow rate in /s.m3   
 
.002ql = 0 × A (7) 
 .0875m .1m  A = 0.002
1.75×10−4 = 0 2 ≃ 0 2  
 
With this area, the filter purchasing cost can be found. Using Figure 5.57b for liquid filter, the 
purchased equipment cost in 2004 dollars was found to be around $600. Converting this to 2019 
dollars, the purchased equipment cost was found to be $900. To find the bare module cost, equation 
(3) and a = 3.6 was used for a stainless steel simple cartridge filter.F BM  
 
900 .6 3, 40CBM = $ × 3 = $ 2  
 
B.3 Operating Cost 
Cost of Electricity 
According to the textbook, power requirements are needed for all mixers, the kiln, the conveyor belt 
and the grinder. The power needed for each agitator is found based on equation (8) with the volume 
of the reactor known. 
(kW ) VP =  0.8  (8) 
 
The first reactor has a volume of 7.39 which requires a power of 4.95 kW of electricity. Once them3  
power requirement is found, the cost for electricity can be used to find the annualized cost. 
Assuming the cost of fuel to be $4/GJ and the plant to run 8064 hr/yr: 
 
.3 (600) .010($4/GJ)C (s,e,2019) = 1 × 10
−4 + 0  
$0.12/kWhC (s,e,2019) =  
=$4,427.57/yr0.94)(4.95kW )($0.12/kW h)(8064 hr/yr)AE = (  
 
This process was repeated to find the annualized cost of the second agitator as well. To find the 
power needed for the kiln, equation (9) from the textbook was used along with the internal volume 
of the kiln.  
(kW ) 0.15P =  × V (9) 
 
27 
Based on the length-diameter ratio of 15, a diameter of 1.7 m, a height of 25 m, the volume was 
found to be 56.75 m​3​.  With this volume the power was found to be 8.5125 kW. Using this power 
and the cost of electricity, the annualized cost can be found. 
 
=$7,614.08/yr0.94)(8.5125kW )($0.12/kW h)(8064 hr/yr)AE = (  
 
To find the power needed for the conveyor belt, equation (10) was used from the textbook along 
with a 10 m length and the mass flow rate. 
 
(kW ) .007mP = 0 0.85 × L            (10) 
 
With this equation a power of 0.1668 kW was found and used with the cost of electricity to find the 
annualized cost. 
 
=$149.20/yr0.94)(0.1668kW )($0.12/kW h)(8064 hr/yr)AE = (  
 
To find the power needed for the grinder, equation (11) was used to find a power of 92.5 kW and an 
annualized cost of $82,737.45/yr. 
 
(kW ) 00P = 5 × m           (11) 
 
Cost of Steam 
Using energy given by OLI:flowsheet for both the inlet streams and the outlet streams, the 
difference was set equal to the energy the steam needs to supply. Using these equations below, the 
mass flow rate for steam can be found.  
 
− .81 J /hr − .99 J /hr) .25 J /hrQT = Qoutlet − Qinlet = 5 × 10
9 − ( 4 × 109 =  − 8 × 108  
C ΔTQT = − Qsteam = ms p  
.25 J /hr (4.184J /g )(348 98)− 8 × 108 = ms · K − 2  
, 47, 03.349 g/hrms = 3 9 7  
 
Cost for steam and the annualized cost can be calculated assuming steam is supplied at 32 barg and 
the cost of fuel to $4/GJ. 
 
.7 (m ) (600) .0034(P ) ($4/GJ)C (s,s,2019) = 2 × 10
−5
s
−0.9 + 0 0.05  
0.029/kgC (s,s,2019) = $  
, 47.70kg/hr ($0.029/kg)(8064 hr/yr) 907, 94.84AE = 3 9 = $ 5  
 
Cost of Operator  
28 
Each piece of equipment uses a certain amount of operator time and effort, represented by an 
operating factor. The operating factor for each piece of equipment is shown in the table below. 
Based on each piece of equipment in this process,the total operating factor is 1.7. Using this and 
equation (12) the annualized operating cost can be found. 
 
Table B.3.1: Number of Operators for Each Type of Equipment  
Piece of Equipment Operating Factor 
Reactor w/ mixer 0.3 
Filter 0.1 
Kiln 0.4 
Grinder 0 
Conveyor 0.5 
 
operating factor) 41, 00/yr (1.03)AE = 5 * ( × $ 6
2019−2003            (12) 
1.7) 41, 00/yr (1.03) 567, 24.20/yrAE = 5 * ( × $ 6
2019−2003 = $ 4  
 
 
