Strengthening Psychological, Economic, and Social Resilience of KUB Sendang Rejeki Members in Sleman

ICESRE 20214th International Conference on Education and Social Science Research (ICESRE)Volume 2022Research articleStrengthening Psychological, Economic, andSocial Resilience of KUB Sendang RejekiMembers in SlemanEsti Setiawati*, S Salamah, T TartoSocial Education, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education, Universitas PGRI YogyakartaAbstract.This community service aimed to improve psychological, economic, and socialresilience during the COVID-19 pandemic for members of KUB Sendang Rejeki, Sribit,Sendangtirto, Berbah, Sleman. The methods of implementation included providingcounseling and training in managing psychological resistance, physical health andsocial resilience, and in optimizing the local potential of the community. Data werecollected through interviews, observations and supporting documents. The results ofthe counseling and training showed that understanding and skills of psychologicalresilience, physical management, social resilience of the community, cultivating thelocal potential, and family economic resilience during the COVID-19 pandemic allincreased.Keywords: strengthening, psychological, economic, and social resilience1. IntroductionPsychological, economic and social resilience is verymuch needed in dealingwith socialproblems around us. The problems currently facing the Indonesian people are socialand other problems relating to the economic, psychological and spiritual fields as aresult of the unfinished Covid 19 pandemic. This problem has rocked almost the wholeworld and is a big problem that we need to deal with together simultaneously andcomprehensively. Because, the covid-19 pandemic causes anxiety in the community,where low levels of anxiety are potentially deadly and can cause a person to notcare about avoiding transmission which leads to neglect of measures of distance orhygiene. Likewise, high levels of anxiety can lead to dysfunctional behavior such ashoarding essential items (hygiene products, food, medical supplies), which can add tothe burden on others [1].This situation cannot be predicted beforehand, but everyone is forced to accept thesituation with all the limitations of their abilities. Because, the danger of the Covid19 outbreak cannot be ignored, because it has a broad impact on the safety andsustainability of the nation’s next generation. This is because there have been manyHow to cite this article: Esti Setiawati*, S Salamah, T Tarto, (2022), “Strengthening Psychological, Economic, and Social Resilience of KUB SendangRejeki Members in Sleman” in 4th International Conference on Education and Social Science Research (ICESRE), KnE Social Sciences, pages937–945. DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i14.12044Page 937Corresponding Author: EstiSetiawati; email: esti@upy.ac.idPublished: 28 September 2022Publishing services provided byKnowledge EEsti Setiawati et al. This articleis distributed under the terms ofthe Creative CommonsAttribution License, whichpermits unrestricted use andredistribution provided that theoriginal author and source arecredited.Selection and Peer-review underthe responsibility of the ICESRE2021 Conference Committee.ICESRE 2021victims, both from the medical community and the general public, which are quite a lot.Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other disasters or very severe economiccrises can be categorized as traumatic events that can have a negative impact on anindividual’s psychological system [2]. In the first two weeks after the outbreak, it wasreported that many women experienced higher levels of stress, anxiety and depressionthan men, and mentioned that the coronavirus affects some individuals emotionally,they experience fear of contracting the virus, feel helpless and have a high negativestigma [3].To overcome this situation, the government urges the public to do WFH (work fromhome), work from home, whether they are government employees, private, or self-employed, including those who are at a vulnerable age and have a poor medicalhistory. Students in schools from kindergarten to Senior High School and students arealso required to learn from home (BDR) through monitoring and guidance of teachers,parents, and supervisors. Most of the people around us, refrain from doing activitiesoutside the home. Work, study and worship, all done at home. No exception abroad,for example New Zealanders to stay indoors. People can only leave the home, if theyare in dire need of groceries, medical supplies or care, and exercise in their immediateenvironment, with some exceptions for health workers, care workers, and grocery storeattendants [4].There are some communities around us who are affected by this problem, with thetermination of employment relationships, part-time work, and shift work. Conditions likethis certainly add to the heavy burden on families from the economic sector. Meanwhile,the needs of daily life continue to increase and demand that all be fulfilled. The needto fill the stomach also cannot be postponed, because as ammunition to survive. All ofthese problems have become major challenges for the people and nation of Indonesiain the last few months. Therefore, the main weapon for reducing pandemics is behavior,such as encouraging people to comply with government instructions, self-isolating,quarantine, and physical distancing [5].Apart from economic aspects, other aspects were also affected fluctuatively. Theimpact of social, psychological and spiritual aspects can also be felt in everyday life. Astriking social problem near us is the prohibition of a culture of gathering in various formsof activities, such as PKK social gathering in the village, routine recitation in mosques,in village arisan groups, fathers patrolling forums, all of which stop for a while.Therefore, it takes a touch from stakeholders around the community, so that a difficultsituation like this can be resolved through synergy and collaborative programs fromvarious institutions that care and are responsible. This required program will certainlyDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i14.12044 Page 938ICESRE 2021be able to strengthen and increase psychological, economic, and social resilience,namely the ability to build psychological, economic and social resilience by havingmental, social and psychological strength and resilience so that they can create anindependent life, develop themselves and their families so that built a harmonioussociety that is physically and mentally prosperous. lthough the handling of Covid-19to date has focused primarily on controlling the spread and preventing death, thispandemic has the potential to create a secondary crisis in the form of psychologicalstress and an overflow of the mental health system [6].One of the programs that can be developed is the ”Galang Tulung” program, whichis an action or activity to initiate mental health and social health in the communitywhich will foster enthusiasm to rise from economic, psychological, social, and spiritualadversity, so that community resilience is maintained.When viewed from a psychologicalperspective, a pandemic like this is a life event associated with uncertainty, ambiguityand loss of control, each of which can trigger emotional stress and distress, includingsymptoms of internalization (anxiety and depression) and anger [7]. Early research onthe effects of the Covid-19 pandemic shows that aspects of mental health have begun tobe disrupted, even in homes that do not contain family members who have contractedCOVID-19 [8].The ”Galang Tulung” program can be translated into special programs that tar-get three types of community resilience, namely psychological resilience, economicresilience, and social resilience. This program is in the form of strengthening and trainingto strengthen psychological resilience, strengthening economic resilience, and socialresilience. Of course this program also involves the local hamlet government so thatmoral and material support can boost community enthusiasm in increasing psycholog-ical, economic and social resilience in the face of the Covid 19 pandemic. Becausethe COVID-19 pandemic has substantially changed our lives, career trajectories, andfeelings of security, causing serious impacts on mental health, it is necessary to addressefforts to increasemental, economic and social resilience through targeted and effectiveprogram interventions [9].2. MethodThe implementation model in this community service activity is a model of outreachand training through various methods of lecturing, question and answer, practice, andconsultation clinics. The activities of strengthening psychological and social resilience,with the following activities.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i14.12044 Page 939ICESRE 20211. Exposure to material on self-management psychology and counseling practices.2. Exposure to material on mental health management and mental health exercise.3. Discussion and question and answer about the problem of psychological resilience4. Exposure to material on social resilience management5. Management of the local potential of Kepok banana to become crispy bananachips.6. Expressing self-esteem for increasing psychological, economic and socialresilience.The targets of this training activity are women who are members of the SendangRejeki Joint Business Group (KUB) in Sribit Hamlet, Sendangtirto, Berbah, who wereaffected by the COVID-19 pandemic, totaling around 15 people. The main theme inthis community service activity is strengthening psychological, economic and socialresilience, through community empowerment with the “Galang Tulung” program forresidents of communities affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.The organizer of this activity is three lecturers of the Postgraduate Social SciencesEducation Masters Program at the PGRI Yogyakarta University, involving resource per-sons from UMKM in the field of home industry in Bantul Regency.The training activities are carried out in four stages. The first stage is the presentationof material on self-psychological management in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic.This form of training begins with counseling and is continued with personal counselingfrom the training participants if they have unsolved problems.The second stage of the activity was the presentation of material on mental healthcounseling and mental health gymnastics training. Mental health training is carried outsimply, while sitting can be done.The third stage is the presentation of social resilience counseling materials, followedby group discussions about actual problems that have occurred in the community duringthe Covid 19 pandemic.The fourth stage is a training activity for the management of the local community’spotential, in the form of Kepok bananas which can be processed into crispy bananachips which have a high selling price in the market.3. ResultDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i14.12044 Page 940ICESRE 20213.1. Results of the First Stage ActivitiesThe first stage of community service activities for the mothers of the members of KUBSendang Rejeki, Sribit Hamlet, Sendangtirto, Berbah, Sleman, was carried out on alimited offline basis while still following health protocols, can be explained in the Table1.The first phase of activities will be held on Saturday, April 2, 2021, offline by followingthe health protocol recommended by the government. The number of participantsis 15 people who actively follow until it’s finished. Based on the observations of thecommunity service implementer and the chairman of KUB Sendang Rejeki, this firstphase of community service activities can run well and smoothly in accordance withthe stated goals. This community service activity certainly has a positive impact eventhough not all members can attend, because of the corona pandemic period so only50% were allowed to attend. This can be seen from the number of mothers who askquestions about stress, emotional shock, depression, and self-hallucinations. Besidesthat, mothers also asked via WhatsApp. If through WhatsApp, executors of communityservice activities immediately respond by providing explanations as necessary andtowards the goals.3.2. Results of the second Stage ActivitiesThe second stage of activities in the service of the members of KUB Sendang Rejeki,Sribit, Sendangtirto, Berbah, Sleman, carried out on a limited basis by following thehealth protocols according to government recommendations, can be explained in theTable 2.The second phase of activity was carried out on Saturday, April 9, 2021 for a limitedoffline basis by following the health protocol from the government. The number ofparticipants is 18 people who actively follow until the end. Based on the results ofobservations on community service activities and observations from the chairman ofKUB Sendangrejeki, the second phase of community service activities can run well eventhough not all participants can attend, because it is limited to only 50% of members whocan participate. This community service activity can run according to the design thathas been carried out, namely through direct face-to-face although on a limited scale.Activities run smoothly, although sometimes there are technical problems with the useof the projector which sometimes turns itself off if it is used too long.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i14.12044 Page 941ICESRE 20213.3. Results of the Third Stage ActivitiesThe third phase of community service activities is carried out on Saturday, April 17, 2021through limited offline activities following the health protocol recommended by thegovernment. This third stage activity, explained related to increasing social resilience inthe community. The details of time distribution in the delivery of material on increasingsocial resilience can be explained in the table 3.This third community service activity was felt to be the most interesting for the trainingparticipants, because when it comes to talking about the social life of the community itbecomes a very broad discussion. This is because the training participants felt that thissocial impact was very touching during the Covid 19 pandemic, because they could notvisit each other and gather with neighbors or relatives. However, this activity actuallyreceived a lot of appreciation, because this activity also emphasized the existence of the”Galang Tulung” activity between hamlet residents in the face of the Covid 19 pandemic,namely by providing food assistance for residents in need, which was placed near thelocal security post, so that it was easy. reachable by anyone without feeling ”ewuhpakewuh”. The activity was exciting, there were lots of questions, input and suggestionsto strengthen the social resilience of the community, such as helping directly for peoplewith Covid 19 who are undergoing independent isolation at home.3.4. Results of the Fourth Stage ActivitiesThe fourth stage of community service activities is carried out on Saturday, April 24,2021 through limited offline activities following the health protocol recommended bythe government. This fourth stage activity explains the processing of local potential toincrease the economic resilience of the community. The details of the time division inthe delivery of the local raw material processing material ”banana kapok” into crispychips can be explained in the table 4.This fourth community service activity is the last offline service activity, because thenext service activity, namely monitoring andmentoring for training participants, is carriedout online, given the situation and recommendations from the local village government.The training activity of processing yellow kapok banana raw material into crispy chipshas had a tremendous impact. The mothers were enthusiastic about participating in thetraining and tried to alternate chopping and frying banana chips. The final result showsthat crispy banana chips are suitable for consumption, healthy, halal, and delicious.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i14.12044 Page 942ICESRE 20214. CONCLUSION1. Counseling and training activities to increase psychological resilience, can runsmoothly, and produce good development for members of KUB Sendang Rejeki,which is marked by increased enthusiasm and passion for life in the face of theCovid 19 pandemic.2. Themotivation of the training participants was very high to understand the counsel-ing material, especially about mental health and improvement of physical healthduring the Covid 19 pandemic, as evidenced by their direct attendance at thetraining activities which took place at the house of the head of KUB SendangRejeki on time.3. The training activities that have been carried out by the service team have thebenefit of honing the knowledge and skills of the members of KUB SendangRejeki in managing social resilience and economic resilience.4. Community service activities can run well even though they are carried out on alimited basis because it is still during the Covid 19 pandemic, which was attendedby members and chairmen of KUB Sendang Rejeki for four activities in an orderlymanner.5. DiscussionThe follow-up of this training to increase psychological, economic and social resilienceis the process of social psychological assistance to the mothers of KUB Sendang Rejekimembers and assistance in developing crispi chips products to improve the qualityof their processed products, so that they can be widely marketed in the community.Assistance is carried out in the form of open consultation via WhatsApp or telephone,which is to provide opportunities for members of the KUB Sendang Rejeki to discussand consult on improving social psychological health, as well as the development ofcrispi crispy products, which are currently starting to be developed. better understandin increasing psychological, economic and social resilience in a sustainable manner.Because if it is not handled seriously, the reported impact of the Covid-19 pandemicwill be very high, especially the associated economic and social impacts, as well asthe spread of mental health problems and declining physical health [10]. Because thereare several studies that highlight gender differences regarding mental health duringpandemic, in which women are reported to have higher levels of distress than men [9].DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i14.12044 Page 943ICESRE 2021AcknowledgmentsWe would like to express our gratitude to the Institute for Research and CommunityService, University of PGRI Yogyakarta, which has provided support for communityservice funding for the 2021 budget year.References[1] Vigo D, Patten S, Pajer K et al. Mental health of communities during theCOVID-19 pandemic. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry. 2020;65(10):681-687.https://doi.org/10.1177/0706743720926676[2] Masiero M, Mazzocco K, Harnois C, Cropley M, Pravettoni G. From individualto social trauma: Sources of everyday trauma in Italy, the US and UK duringthe COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation. 2020;21(5):513-519.https://doi.org/10.1080/15299732.2020.1787296[3] Irawan AW, Dwisona D, Lestari M. Psychological impacts of students on onlinelearning during the pandemic COVID-19. KONSELI: Jurnal Bimbingan dan Konseling(E-Journal). 2020;7(1):53-60. https://doi.org/10.24042/kons.v7i1.6389[4] C.G. Sibley, L.M. Greaves, N. Satherley, et al., “Effects of the COVID-19 pandemicand nationwide lockdown on trust, attitudes toward government, and well-being.,”American Psychologist. vol. 75, no. 5, pp. 618–630, 2020.[5] O’Connor DB, Aggleton JP, Chakrabarti B et al. Research priorities for the COVID￿19pandemic and beyond: A call to action for psychological science. British Journal ofPsychology. 2020;111(4):603-29. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjop.12468[6] Choi KR, Heilemann MV, Fauer A, Mead M. A second pandemic: Mental healthspillover from the novel coronavirus (COVID-19). Journal of the American PsychiatricNurses Association. 2020;26(4):340-343. https://doi.org/10.1177/10783903209 19803[7] L. Shanahan, A. Steinhoff, L. Bechtiger, et al., “Emotional distress in young adultsduring the COVID-19 pandemic: evidence of risk and resilience from a longitudinalcohort study.,” Psychological Medicine. vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 824–833, 2022.[8] G. Bono, K. Reil, and J. Hescox, “Stress and wellbeing in urban college students inthe U.S. during the COVID-19 pandemic: Can grit and gratitude help?,” InternationalJournal of Wellbeing. vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 39–57, 2020[9] S. Alonzi, A. La Torre, and M.W. Silverstein, “The psychological impact ofpreexisting mental and physical health conditions during the COVID-19 pandemic.,”DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i14.12044 Page 944ICESRE 2021Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy. vol. 12, no. S1, pp.S236–S238, 2020[10] J.T. Mueller, K. McConnell, P.B. Burow, K. Pofahl, A.A. Merdjanoff, and J. Farrell,“Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on rural America.,” Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences. vol. 118, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2021.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i14.12044 Page 945