Economic Recovery Through Community Empowerment  to Reduce Impact of the Covid-19

Submitted: 2020-04-02; Accepted: 2020-06-04; Published: 2020-06-30  
                *Corresponding author: kiki_sukiyani85@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Prosperity: Journal of Society and Empowerment 
Vol. 1 No. 1 (June 2021): 65-71 
DOI: 10.21580/prosperity.2021.1.1.8264 
 
Economic Recovery Through Community Empowerment  
to Reduce Impact of the Covid-19  
 
Sukiyani 
Universitas Pembangunan Nasional Veteran Yogyakarta, Indonesia 
e-mail: kiki_sukiyani85@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic Disaster is still very much felt by the 
economy of the people in the Special Region of Yogyakarta. The purpose of this 
research is to map the policies of the Provincial Government of the Special Region 
of Yogyakarta in empowering the community to the perpetrators of cooperative 
activities, micro, small and medium enterprises and to map the operational 
strategies carried out for the development of these policies. This study uses 
qualitative methods and uses secondary data from various kinds of literature 
such as books, articles, related journals regarding empowerment policies for 
actors in cooperative activities, micro, small and medium enterprises from the 
impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. The data analysis technique used in this 
research is descriptive analysis. The results of the research, it is known that the 
success of community empowerment policies for actors in cooperative activities, 
micro, small and medium enterprises in the Special Region of Yogyakarta from 
the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic disaster in the first quarter of 2021 
experienced growth compared to the first quarter of 2020. The biggest 
contribution to economic growth in the Special Region of Yogyakarta in the first 
quarter of 2021 is the information and communication business field. 
 
Keywords: Disaster, Covid-19 pandemic, Economi, Special Region of Yogyakarta 
 
ABSTRAK 
 
Dampak Bencana Pandemi Covid-19 masih sangat dirasakan oleh perekonomian 
masyarakat di Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah 
untuk memetakan kebijakan Pemerintah Provinsi Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta 
dalam pemberdayaan masyarakat kepada pelaku kegiatan koperasi, usaha 
mikro, kecil dan menengah serta memetakan strategi operasional yang 
dilakukan untuk pengembangan usaha tersebut. Penelitian ini menggunakan 
metode kualitatif dan menggunakan data sekunder dari berbagai macam 
literatur seperti buku, artikel, jurnal terkait mengenai kebijakan pemberdayaan 
bagi pelaku kegiatan koperasi, usaha mikro, kecil dan menengah dari dampak 
                                              
                                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
 
66      Vol. 1 (1), June 2021 
Prosperity: Journal of Society and Empowerment 
pandemi Covid-19. Teknik analisis data yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini 
adalah analisis deskriptif. Hasil penelitian diketahui bahwa keberhasilan 
kebijakan pemberdayaan masyarakat bagi pelaku kegiatan koperasi, usaha 
mikro, kecil dan menengah di Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta dari dampak bencana 
pandemi Covid-19 pada triwulan I tahun 2021 mengalami pertumbuhan 
dibandingkan triwulan I tahun 2020. Kontribusi terbesar terhadap pertumbuhan 
ekonomi Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta pada triwulan I tahun 2021 adalah bidang 
usaha informasi dan komunikasi. 
 
Kata kunci: Bencana; Pandemik covid-19, Ekonomi, dan Daerah Istimewa 
Yogyakarta 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Covid-19 pandemic has had an impact on the economic sector in all provinces in Indonesia 
(Susilawati, Falefi, & Purwoko, 2020) and (Pakpahan, 2020), one of which is the Province of the 
Special Region of Yogyakarta. The implementation of restrictions on community activities in 
Indonesia as an effort to handle the Covid-19 pandemic disaster has caused significant economic 
losses both nationally and in the Province of the Special Region of Yogyakarta (Hadiwardoyo, 2020). 
Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises are one of the ones experiencing the 
biggest impact on the economy in the Special Region of Yogyakarta caused by several factors, 
namely a decrease in the number of sales due to a decrease in the number of requests by partners 
by delaying product purchases and at the same time other actors Cooperative activities, Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises have difficulty getting raw materials and the price of raw materials 
has also increased so they have to reduce the number of workers (Prasetyo & Huda, 2019) and 
make production capacity decrease which results in obstacles in production which ultimately 
experience capital difficulties and experience cash flow problems (Febrantara, 2020). 
The Provincial Government of the Special Region of Yogyakarta which has the authority to carry 
out economic recovery in the Special Region of Yogyakarta is expected to provide facilities to 
increase public consumption in the Special Region of Yogyakarta, one of the efforts to reduce the 
risk of the Covid-19 disaster in the economic sector is through the empowerment of cooperatives, 
micro, small businesses and middle school in the Special Region of Yogyakarta. 
According to Government Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 7 of 2021 
concerning Ease, Protection, and Empowerment of Cooperatives and Micro, Small, and Medium 
Enterprises, what is meant by Cooperatives is a business entity consisting of one person or a legal 
entity of Cooperatives by basing their activities on the principles of Cooperatives as well as a 
people's economic movement based on the principle of kinship (Abidin, 2015). Micro Enterprises 
are productive businesses owned by individuals and or individual business entities that meet the 
criteria for Micro Enterprises. Small Business is a productive economic business that stands alone, 
which is carried out by individuals or business entities that are not subsidiaries or not branches of 
companies that are owned, controlled, or become part of either directly or indirectly from Medium 
Enterprises or large businesses that meet the criteria for Small Businesses. Medium Enterprises are 
productive economic businesses that stand alone, which are carried out by individuals or business 
 
Economic Recovery Through Community Empowerment to Reduce Impact of the Covid-19  
 
 
67            Vol. 1 (1), June 2021 
entities that are not subsidiaries or branches of companies that are owned, controlled, or become 
part of either directly or indirectly with Small Businesses or large businesses that meet the criteria 
for Medium Enterprises. Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises are grouped based on the criteria 
for working capital or annual sales results. The criteria for working capital as referred to in 
paragraph (1) consist of: Micro Enterprises having a business capital of up to a maximum of Rp. 
1,000,000,000.00 (one billion rupiah) excluding land and buildings for business premises; Small 
Business has a business capital of more than Rp. 1,000,000,000.00 (one billion rupiah) up to a 
maximum of Rp5.000.000.000,00 (five billion rupiahs) excluding land and buildings for business 
premises; and Medium Enterprises have a business capital of more than Rp. 5,000,000,000.00 (five 
billion rupiah) up to a maximum of Rp. 10,000,000,000.00 (ten billion rupiah) excluding land and 
buildings for business premises. 
The criteria for annual sales results consist of: Micro-enterprises having annual sales of up to a 
maximum of Rp. 2,000,000,000.00 (two billion rupiah); Small Business has annual sales of more 
than Rp. 2,000,000,000.00 (two billion rupiah) up to a maximum of Rp. 15,000,000,000.00 (fifteen 
billion rupiah); and Medium Enterprises have annual sales of more than Rp. 15,000,000,000.00 
(fifteen billion rupiahs) up to a maximum of Rp. 50,000,000,000.00 (fifty billion rupiahs). 
 
2. METHODS 
This study used descriptive qualitative methods by utilizing secondary data derived from 
various literatures such as books, articles, related journals regarding the policy of empowerment 
and strengthening of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises from the impact of the 
Covid-19 pandemic disaster. The use of descriptive qualitative methods aims to provide a 
description and get a clear picture that is useful for answering the formulation of the problem, 
namely about how the policies of the Yogyakarta Special Region Government in saving 
Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic 
disaster and what strategies are being implemented. can be done for the development of 
Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the Special Region of Yogyakarta. 
 
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
3.1 The Impact of the Pandemic on Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the 
Special Region of Yogyakarta 
The impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic disaster experienced by Cooperatives, Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises, among others, there was a decline in sales due to reduced community 
activities with the Enforcement of Restrictions on Community Activities so that Micro, Small, and 
Medium Business actors had difficulty obtaining capital due to declining sales levels. , the existence 
of product distribution barriers due to restrictions on the movement of product distribution in 
certain areas, the difficulty of raw materials because Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises activities 
depend on the availability of raw materials from other industrial sectors (Febrantara, 2020). 
 
3.2.1 Efforts of the Provincial Government of the Special Region of Yogyakarta  
The Indonesian government needs to make various efforts to help the community's economy 
through various policies (Susilawati et al., 2020). The success of the government's policy is highly 
                                              
                                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
 
68      Vol. 1 (1), June 2021 
Prosperity: Journal of Society and Empowerment 
dependent on the support of the components of business actors in the community. The community 
and the government must jointly protect the economy from the impact of Covid-19 (Hanoatubun, 
2020). The policies of the Provincial Government of the Special Region of Yogyakarta in dealing with 
the impact of the Covid-19 disaster on the activities of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises in the Special Region of Yogyakarta through the Office of Cooperatives and Small and 
Medium Enterprises, are as follows:  
(1) Economic Recovery Through Empowerment of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises in the New Normal Era, among others: Strengthening the Capacity of Cooperatives, 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by surviving, striving, creative and innovative. First, human 
Resources Empowerment, access to capital; IT-based online marketing, fulfillment of raw materials, 
production stability, regulatory support, value development with business vision transformation, 
bussines checkups, partnerships and mutual cooperation, team management. Second, adapting to 
market conditions, business opportunities, consumer behavior, and being flexible to changes. Third, 
creating social & economic resilience in the region in the face of the Covid-19 pandemic disaster, by 
suppressing the spread of the Covid-19 Pandemic so that the economy rises (Recovery Economy), 
realizing social resilience in the new normal era. Fourth, regulation of Cooperatives, Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises by correcting data through the SIBAKUL application, conducting a survey 
of the impact of covid on Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, making Procedures 
& Standard Operating Procedures for the New Normal Era on Cooperatives, Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises activities, and socializing Standard Operating Procedures. Fifth, acceleration of 
Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by partnering with online markets, Free 
Shipping subsidies, Cooperative Assistance, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Interest subsidies 
and credit facilities, Media campaigns, loan restructuring. Sixth, cooperative Adjustment, Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Virtual Q-RIS (Quick Response Code Indonesian Standard), On-line 
business, on-line Cooperative Annual Member Meeting, On-line training, On-line market, 
Transaction security. 
(2) Revitalizing the People's Economy through the Development of the "Sibakul" Application, 
namely: First, recovery of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by providing access 
to capital, markets or markets, product competitiveness, digital technology, business strategies, 
corporation culture or partnerships. Second, data Update, Supervision, Online Annual Member 
Meeting, Modern Cooperative. Second, Free-shipping Markethub, Cooperative Product Curation, 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Local Resources, Business Product Quality Digital, Customer 
Orientation, Marketing Strategy, Business Cooperation Product Identity. Third, recovery, Ease of 
Reorientation, Development. Fourth, supply Chains, Business Processes. MarketHub, Market Place, 
Market Oriented, Branding. Fifth, the development of the "Sibakuljogja" application in an integrated 
manner by fostering Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, namely by monitoring 
and evaluating through coaching records on the profile of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises in the "SibakulJogja" application. 
(3) Initiating the Village Preneur Program is a village or sub-district that has the ability to 
stimulate the dynamics of economic entrepreneurship based on potential and local wisdom, 
through business units to be managed to be of global quality by strengthening community capacity 
in a sustainable manner (Kemenkop-UKM, 2018; Burhan, F., 2020). 
 
Economic Recovery Through Community Empowerment to Reduce Impact of the Covid-19  
 
 
69            Vol. 1 (1), June 2021 
3.2 Operational Strategy in the Recovery and Strengthening of Cooperatives and Small and 
Medium Enterprises 
The recovery and strengthening of MSME policies is carried out by increasing synergies between 
programs and between government institutions (Hadiwardoyo, 2020). The Operational Strategy of 
the Provincial Government of the Special Region of Yogyakarta in dealing with the impact of the 
Covid-19 disaster on the activities of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the 
Special Region of Yogyakarta through the Office of Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises, 
among others: (1) Handling Management by conducting Valid Data Management, Regulatory 
Facilitation, Promotion, Coaching, Online/Offline Training & Assistance, Networking, Online 
Marketing, Partnership Cooperation, Investors, Distributors, Suppliers, Cooperative Development, 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Acceleration , Publication, Promotion. (2) Involving Multi 
Stakeholders, namely Central Government, Local Government, Private, Academics, Community, 
Media, Society. (3) Capacity Building on Raw Materials by maintaining Availability, Supply, 
Production, Product Design, Stock Management, Curation, providing access to capital (Turnover, 
Profit, Loan Restructuring, Ease of Credit), Strengthening human resources through competency 
improvement, Member Participation, and Health Protocol. (4) Marketing with Supply, Distribution, 
Digital Marketing, Virtual and Offline Exhibitions. 
Regulatory support with the Decree of the Governor of the Special Region of Yogyakarta and 
the Circular Letter of the Governor of the Special Region of Yogyakarta concerning the Purchase of 
Cooperative Products and Small and Medium Enterprises. The policies that have been carried out 
by the Provincial Government of the Special Region of Yogyakarta in dealing with the impact of the 
Covid-19 disaster on the activities of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the 
Special Region of Yogyakarta through the Office of Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises, 
are as follows:  
First, Cross-Sectoral & Cross-Authority Synergy by assisting with Pre-Employment Card 
Registration, Facilitating the Registration of Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises 
Prospective Banpres Recipients Earning Rp 2.4 million, Partnerships with Corporate Social 
Responsibility/Partnership Programs and Community Development/Private/Owned Enterprises 
Countries Related to Empowerment of Small and Medium Enterprises, Partnering with online 
marketplace applications such as Gojek, Grab, Tokopedia, Jogjakita, Whatsapp Business for 
Marketplace Development, Encouraging Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises to Get 
Affordable Credit Assistance by Banks Through the National Economic Recovery Scheme, Exemption 
of Rent Fees for Products of Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises at the Gallery and 
Small and Medium Enterprises at Yogyakarta Airport Internasional Airport, Optimizing Field Work 
Practice Students as Customer Service Free Shipping for seven days a week. (1) Improvement of 
Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises Development Scheme Development of the 
“Sibakul Jogja” Application as a Marketplace, by Disseminating Health Protocols to Small, Micro and 
Medium Enterprises in Strategic Locations, Tiered Training for Small, Micro and Medium Enterprises 
Affected by the Pandemic, Dissemination of the Indonesian Quick Response Code Standard for 
Small, Micro and Medium Enterprises to Increase Digital Transactions, Online Registration of 
Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises Through the "Sibakul" application to obtain 
Training Package Facilities, Issuance of Travel Certificates for Cooperatives and Small and Medium 
                                              
                                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
 
70      Vol. 1 (1), June 2021 
Prosperity: Journal of Society and Empowerment 
Enterprises whose Operational Areas are Outside the Special Region of Yogyakarta. (2) Market 
Dynamics by Providing Marketing Stimulus for Small and Medium Business Products through Free 
Shipping, Making Pottery Masks & Sinks through Empowerment of Small and Medium Enterprises, 
Development of Virtual Small and Medium Enterprises Exhibition, Dissemination of Circular Letter 
of the Governor of the Special Region of Yogyakarta Number 519/7669 concerning Purchase of 
Business Products Small and Medium Enterprises, Encouraging Online Marketing for Cooperatives 
and Small and Medium Enterprises Through Existing Marketplaces. (3) Initiating and developing 
Preneur Village. 
 
4. CONCLUSION 
Based on the results of the study, the success of the community empowerment policy for the 
perpetrators of cooperative activities, micro, small and medium enterprises in the Special Region of 
Yogyakarta from the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic that the economy in the Special Region of 
Yogyakarta in the first quarter of 2021 experienced growth compared to the first quarter of 2020. 
The biggest contribution to economic growth in the Special Region of Yogyakarta in the first quarter 
of 2021 is the information and communication business field.  
The activities of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the Special Region of 
Yogyakarta are experiencing the impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic Disaster, namely Decrease in 
Sales, Difficulty in Capital, Barriers to Product Distribution, and Difficulty in Raw Materials. The 
Provincial Government of the Special Region of Yogyakarta has made efforts to empower and 
strengthen the community involved in the activities of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises in the Special Region of Yogyakarta by conducting a Survey of Cooperatives, Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises affected by the Covid-19 pandemic, providing purchasing power 
stimulus to the community through the free shipping program, building partnerships in marketing 
and promotion, revitalizing the "Sibakul-Jogja" application into a Marketplace/Markethub, initiating 
Virtual Exhibitions, On-Line Businesses, Non-Cash Transactions, Assistance for Cooperatives, Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises routinely, carry out an inventory of financing for Cooperatives, 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (easy installments, and free of income tax), Empowering 
Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in supporting the handling of Covid-19 (Making 
masks, Personal Protective Equipment, Handwashing Places, etc.), Pre-Employment Card 
Assistance, Su Facilitation rat Information on Business Networks for Cooperatives, Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises and Socialization of Standard Operating Procedures regarding Health Protocols 
in the New Normal era for the activities of Cooperatives, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
5. REFERENCES 
Abidin, M. (2015). Kebijakan Fiskal dan Peningkatan Peran Ekonomi UMKM.  
Burhan, F. (2020). Bisnis Anjlok Akibat Pandemi Corona, UMKM Bisa Uabh Strategi Usaha  
Dinas Koperasi dan UKM Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta. (2020). Program Pemulihan Ekonomi Melalui 
Optimalisasi UMKM Pada Era New Normal di Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta 
Febrantara, D. (2020). Bagaimana Penanganan UKM di Berbagai Negara Saat Ada Pandemi Covid-19 
Hadiwardoyo, W. (2020). Kerugian Ekonomi Nasional Akibat Pandemi Covid-19  
 
Economic Recovery Through Community Empowerment to Reduce Impact of the Covid-19  
 
 
71            Vol. 1 (1), June 2021 
Hanoatubun, S. (2020). Dampak Covid–19 terhadap Prekonomian Indonesia. EduPsyCouns: Journal 
of Education, Psychology and Counseling, 2(1), 146-153 
Kemenkes. (2020). Surat Edaran No. HK.02.01/MENKES/335/2020 tentang Protokol Pencegahan 
Penularan COVID-19 di Tempat Kerja Sektor Jasa dan Perdagangan (Area Publik) dalam 
Mendukung Keberlangsungan Usaha. Jakarta 
Kemenkop-UKM. (2018). Perkembangan Data Usaha Mikro, Kecil, Menengah (UMKM) dan Usaha 
Besar (UB). 
Kemenkop-UKM. (2020). Menkop dan UKM Paparkan Skema Pemulihan Ekonomi KUKM di Masa 
dan Pasca COVID-19  
Maftuchan, A. (2020). Policy Brief 21-Program Tunai di Era COVID-19: Bantuan Tunai Korona atau 
Jaminan Penghasilan Semesta 
Media Indonesia.Com. (15 Mei 2020). Kemenkop Ajak Pelaku UMKM dan Masyarakat Taat Protokol 
Kesehatan. Media Indonesia  
Pakpahan, A. K. (2020). COVID-19 dan Implikasi Bagi Usaha Mikro, Kecil, dan Menengah. Jurnal 
Ilmiah Hubungan Internasional, 59-64 
Peraturan Pemerintah Republik Indonesia Nomor 7 Tahun 2021 Tentang Kemudahan, Pelindungan, 
dan Pemberdayaan Koperasi Dan Usaha Mikro, Kecil, Dan Menengah 
Prasetyo, A., & Huda, M. (2019). Analisis Peranan Usaha Kecil dan Menengah Terhadap Penyerapan 
Tenaga Kerja di Kabupaten Kebumen. Fokus Bisnis: Media Pengkajian Manajemen dan 
Akuntansi, 18(1), 26-3 
Susilawati, S., Falefi, R., & Purwoko, A. (2020). Impact of COVID-19’s Pandemic on the Economy of 
Indonesia. Budapest International Research and Critics Institute (BIRCI-Journal): Humanities 
and Social Sciences, 3(2), 1147-1156 
 
 
