Is inclusion the ticket to economic recovery? Perspectives from the “Lucky” country

Bond UniversityResearch RepositoryIs inclusion the ticket to economic recovery? Perspectives from the “Lucky” countryMozolic-Staunton, BethPublished: 04/03/2021Document Version:Peer reviewed versionLicence:Free to readLink to publication in Bond University research repository.Recommended citation(APA):Mozolic-Staunton, B. (2021). Is inclusion the ticket to economic recovery? Perspectives from the “Lucky”country. 4th International Conference “Innovations in occupational therapy”, Poznan, Poland.General rightsCopyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright ownersand it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.For more information, or if you believe that this document breaches copyright, please contact the Bond University research repositorycoordinator.Download date: 18 Jun 2021Is inclusion the ticket to economic recovery? Perspectives from the “Lucky” countryAssociate Professor Beth Mozolic-Staunton, PhD, MSOTR/LWe have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to reset the way we think about the disability sector, positioning it as central to our entire community’s recovery and future prosperity,Australia’s new National Disability Insurance SchemeDubbed the “greatest nation building project on earth”, the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) is up, operational and close to full rollout, at which point it will deliver $22 billion in services and support to Australians each year. These funds go directly to people with disabilities and their families, who use it to access services from local providers, therapy centres and businesses.Job Outlook“It is expected that the NDIS will require an additional 90,000 workers over the next five years, almost doubling the current estimated workforce of 100,000. This represents one of the largest job creation opportunities in Australia’s history.”Employment of occupational therapists is projected to grow 16 percent from 2019 to 2029, much faster than the average for all occupations (ABS,2021)Jobs for an inclusive society(perfect for OTs)• Therapists• Assistive technology specialists• Inclusive education specilaists• Coaches• Social service proiders• Behavioral support practitioners• Consumer experience specialists• Product design/finance/IT/etc. etc.The “Lucky Country”We have the chance to build a society that is inclusive, leaves no one behind and is better for everyone.Contact- Bmozolic@bond.edu.au