Integrating Biophysical and Economic Assessment: Review of Nature-Based Adaptation to Urban Flood Extremes

29 November 2022POLITECNICO DI TORINORepository ISTITUZIONALEIntegrating Biophysical and Economic Assessment: Review of Nature-Based Adaptation to Urban Flood Extremes /Quagliolo, Carlotta; Roebeling, Peter; Mendonça, Rita; Pezzoli, Alessandro; Comino, Elena. - In: URBAN SCIENCE. -ISSN 2413-8851. - ELETTRONICO. - 6:3(2022), p. 53. [10.3390/urbansci6030053]OriginalIntegrating Biophysical and Economic Assessment: Review of Nature-Based Adaptation to Urban FloodExtremesPublisher:PublishedDOI:10.3390/urbansci6030053Terms of use:openAccessPublisher copyright(Article begins on next page)This article is made available under terms and conditions as specified in the  corresponding bibliographic description inthe repositoryAvailability:This version is available at: 11583/2970816 since: 2022-08-30T09:55:27ZMDPICitation: Quagliolo, C.; Roebeling, P.;Mendonça, R.; Pezzoli, A.; Comino, E.Integrating Biophysical andEconomic Assessment: Review ofNature-Based Adaptation to UrbanFlood Extremes. Urban Sci. 2022, 6,53. https://doi.org/10.3390/urbansci6030053Academic Editors: Jürgen Scheffran,Dmitry V. Kovalevsky, LaurensM. Bouwer and Paul C. SuttonReceived: 17 May 2022Accepted: 19 August 2022Published: 23 August 2022Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional affil-iations.Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).ReviewIntegrating Biophysical and Economic Assessment: Review ofNature-Based Adaptation to Urban Flood ExtremesCarlotta Quagliolo 1,* , Peter Roebeling 2,3 , Rita Mendonça 2 , Alessandro Pezzoli 1 and Elena Comino 41 DIST—Interuniversity Department of Regional and Urban Studies and Planning, Politecnico di Torino andUniversità degli Studi di Torino, 10125 Torino, Italy2 Centre for Environmental and Marine Studies (CESAM), Department of Environment and Planning (DAO),University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal3 Wageningen Economic Research, Wageningen University and Research (WUR),6708PB Wageningen, The Netherlands4 DIATI—Department of Environment, Land and Infrastructure Engineering, Politecnico di Torino,10129 Torino, Italy* Correspondence: carlotta.quagliolo@polito.it; Tel.: +39-3333103770Abstract: Over the last decade, the potential of nature-based solutions (NBS) has been recognized tosupport climate change adaptation, by promoting sustainable urban planning. Nevertheless, a wideruptake of such solutions in urban areas faces different challenges and barriers. A comprehensivemapping of available NBS impact assessment methods could help to accelerate this process. Thereis, however, a lack of comprehensive systematization of economic analysis. This research aims toprovide an overview of NBS impact evaluations by assessing how the scientific literature integratessuch economic analysis into urban planning adaptation. A systematic review approach has beenused to discuss the role of NBS in climate change adaptation. This review presents two mainstages. Firstly, it identifies the biophysical–economic assessment of NBS adaptation measures toreduce urban flood extremes in coastal cities. Secondly, the NBS approaches were categorized basedon the biophysical benefits (in terms of flood-risk reduction) related to each specific solution andthe subsequent economic evaluation of such implementations. This research review revealed alow-level gap of integration between climate change issues and NBS analysis (i.e., it is commonlyused as background condition). Most publications provide NBS biophysical impacts assessment,without combining these results with economic evaluation of the flood damages to finally achievethe avoided cost due to the implementation of such solutions. This work shows the growing intereston further research to develop spatially integrated environmental–economic assessment of NBSimplementation, by highlighting the needs and opportunities of a trans-disciplinary approach tosupport policy-making in the framework of urban climate change adaptation.Keywords: climate change adaptation; nature-based solutions (NBS); coastal cities; spatial assessmentmethods1. IntroductionClimate change has been widely acknowledged as a global issue that results in evenlarger impacts on the city level [1]. Although climate change effects are directly related totemperature and sea-level rise, the increasing frequency and severity of urban floods arealso strictly associated with climate change processes [2]. An urban (or pluvial) flood refersto the runoff exceedance in respect to the drainage capacity, during high-intensity and short-duration precipitation events [3,4]. Consequently, the sensitivity of urban areas to runoff isincreasing because of the high level of impervious surfaces and the changes in precipitationpatterns [5,6]. Indeed, these impacts are directly related to microclimate and land-usedifferences within each city, instead of differing only in their geographical locations andclimate conditions [7]. Land-use dominated by built-up areas strongly reduces waterUrban Sci. 2022, 6, 53. https://doi.org/10.3390/urbansci6030053 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/urbansciUrban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 2 of 23infiltration and causes excessive runoff [8]. This situation is likely to become more relevantin the future, particularly in coastal cities where the simultaneous occurrence of pluvialfloods and storm surges, combined with high tides, exacerbates the level of risk [2,9,10].Climate and flood-risk adaptation should be flexible and multifunctional because ofthe uncertainty of climate impacts, especially considering local spatial variability withinthe urban environment [7]. Consequently, urban design principles should be drivenby ecological ideas of non-linearity and heterogeneity [11]. Moreover, harmonizing theincreasingly urban development and the ecological balance of urban spaces is becomingone of the biggest challenges for urban planning [12]. The European Commission (EC)is addressing these challenges by emphasizing the potential of nature-based solutions(NBS) as an urban climate change adaptation strategy, being multifunctional, as well as byproviding connectivity and multiple co-benefits [13,14]. NBS emerged as a new conceptbuilt on older concepts, such as the “ecosystem-based approach”, and has been promotedby the EC through financial support embedded in the Horizon 2020 agenda [15]. Followingthe EC, NBS are intended to be “solutions that are inspired and supported by nature, whichare cost-effective, simultaneously provide environmental, social and economic benefits andhelp build resilience. Such solutions bring diverse natural features and processes into citiesthrough locally adapted, and systemic interventions” [16].To be effective, NBS require trans-sectoral and integrated planning into urban climatechange adaptation for their mainstreaming at the local level. Despite the potential of NBSbeing increasingly recognized, comprehensive knowledge and consistent data about theirbenefits are still missing [17]. In this view, specific assessments of NBS biophysical andeconomic performance could give a significant contribution to overcoming some barriersthat are limiting wider implementation of NBS in cities. Such analysis can aid the urban-planning practice by selecting, simulating, and evaluating NBS application, thus assessingthe related costs and benefits of flood adaptation [18]. Employing such an approach helpsto adopt site-specific performance-based solutions suitable for future urban strategies giventhe climate change trend [19].In literature NBS for flood-risk mitigation range from the building scale, such as greenroofs and facades, to the street and park scale, such as rain gardens and permeable paving.Given their high ability for retrofitting to existing structures, the effectiveness of NBSto reduce flood risk. in terms of peak flow, runoff, flood volume and flooded area. hasbeen addressed by a range of prior studies [3,20–23]. However, more quantitative results,by integrating biophysical and economic (co-)benefits regarding the impacts of NBS, areneeded [18,24,25].The aim of this study is, hence, to analyze how NBS biophysical performance andeconomic impact evaluations are developed and integrated into urban planning adaptation.By systematically reviewing the biophysical and economic assessment of such measuresto address flood extremes in coastal cities, this article discusses the role of NBS in climatechange adaptation planning.The paper consists of five sections. Section 1 includes the introduction, while Section 2presents the applied methodology to conduct the rapid systematic literature review. Section 3shows the results by describing the different phases of the review process, until the in-depth analysis on the focus areas of this article. Finally, a discussion on overlaps and gapsidentified by assessing focus themes has been conducted in Section 4, followed by theconclusions in Section 5.2. Systematic Literature Review: MethodologyA rapid literature review carried out systematically, to examine the recent literaturewith consistency, which has been subjected to the peer-review process [26,27]. The con-duction of rapid reviews, instead of full systematic ones, allows a literature review to beundertaken in a shorter time and with limited financial funding, while being consideredrobust [28,29]. The competences of the authors are strictly related to those needed to coverthe three focus areas (see Section 2.2) considered in this review. This literature review wasUrban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 3 of 23conducted based on a research methodology consisting of two subsequent macrosections(see Figure 1). The first stage (Section 2.1) includes the search phase and three-step proce-dure to create the inventory of the studies, by using a standardized data-extraction sheet(Excel). Subsequently, the selected database has been reviewed, deepening the focus areas.Section 2.2 describes the method employed to collect the relevant concepts, answering thisreview objective.Urban Sci. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 24  robust [28,29]. The competences of the authors are strictly related to those needed to cover the three focus areas (see Section 2.2) considered in this review. This literature review was conducted based on a research methodology consisting of two subsequent macrosections (see Figure 1). The first stage (Section 2.1) includes the search phase and three-step proce-dure to create the inventory of the studies, by using a standardized data-extraction sheet (Excel). Subsequently, the s lec ed database has been reviewed, deepening the focus ar-eas. Section 2.2 describ s the method employ d to collect the rel vant concepts, answering this review objective.  Figure 1. Systematic literature review flowchart. Figure 1. Systematic literature review flowchart.Urban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 4 of 232.1. Search Strategy and Inclusion CriteriaThe initial phase of the review consisted of a literature search for relevant studiespublished in English, up to December 2020. The literature search was finalized in July 2021.In this case, the rapid systematic review has been limited to two electronic search databases.Firstly, the search was carried out by using the online database in Scopus (www.scopus.com(accessed on 16 March 2020)) through a combination of different search strings. Thesearch strategy includes the following combination of terms and their synonyms: “nature-based solution*” together with “flood*”, “cit*”, and “adaptation*”. In order to conduct awider review on nature-based adaptation approaches to mitigate urban-flood issues, otherterminologies meeting the NBS concept have been identified. The definitions related tourban stormwater management became more complex and diverse [30]. Therefore, fouradditional terms overlapping the broad principles of NBS were selected for this search step:sustainable urban drainage system (SuDS), green infrastructure (GI), sponge city (SC), andblue-green city (BGC). The search strings and strategy are available on request to the authors.Given the main focus on exploring NBS, which is a quite recent term, an additional search byadopting the scientific database Web of Science (www.webofknowledge.com (accessed on16 March 2020)) has been conducted [12,15]. This last search includes the same combinationof terms with NBS. After the exclusion of duplicates, 360 publications remained.The first step procedure consists of scanning the titles and keywords. Studies focusedon the following aspects were excluded from further analysis because they were out ofscope (criterion 1—Figure 1):- Governance and institutional aspects;- Hydrological and engineering aspects;- Different hazards from urban and coastal flood;- Inland cities or rural areas.This screening resulted in 157 studies for inclusion in the second step of the reviewprocess. Abstracts were scanned using indicator analysis. Four indicator groups with aset of related keywords were selected in order to have an overview of this review topic.The second screening limited the publications to peer-reviewed articles and book chapters(criterion 2—see Figure 1) and studies that contained at least one economic-related keywordfrom the abstracts (criterion 3—Figure 1). After this step, 71 studies fulfilling all theinclusion criteria remained, and full-text documents were downloaded to conduct thein-depth evaluation. The final number of publications included for the third step of theprocedure is 68, because of the exclusion of studies that could not be accessed. Refer toAppendix A for the full list of selected studies.2.2. Review Focus AreasTo ensure consistency and controlled extracting data across all selected studies, thepublications were analysed using a standardized data-extraction sheet (Excel) inspiredby previous review articles [7,31]. The Excel sheet used to obtain the data is availableon request to the authors. The use of predefined evaluation criteria has been refined inan iterative process, by considering four sections (Table 1): (i) background information,(ii) climate risk information, (iii) economic information, and (iv) adaptation information.For each publication, the whole content was considered in the review.Urban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 5 of 23Table 1. Evaluation criteria used for the in-depth analysis.Category Description IndicatorBackground informationTemporal scale Time of analysis Reference year(s), NASpatial scale Scale of analysis Global, national, regional, local/city, district,neighborhoodGeographical area Setting of conducted analysis Country—Region—City, NAStudy type Kind of methodology used Conceptual/empirical framework,spatial assessment, modellingData used Type of information and dataemployed for the analysis (Short explanation)Data provided Kind of data provided by the study Qualitative, quantitative, spatial, and mixed data(quantitative and qualitative)Climate risk informationClimate hazard Climate and natural hazardsaddressed by the studies Single, compound, and multiple hazardsClimate Change perspective How climate change issue hasbeen addressed by the studies Background, analytical, scenarios, NAEconomic informationEconomic assessment Kind of approach employed in the analysisCost–benefit analysis, Life-cycle cost analysis (LCCA),flood depth damage analysis, unit cost value analysis,cost effectiveness analysis, NACurrency Currency used for the analysisUnit Unit used for the analysisAdaptation informationAdaptation planning perspective How adaptation through NBS implementation isintegrated into urban planning (Short explanation)NBS type Specific NBS to reduce flood-related effects (Most common measures to flood reduction)NBS approach Kind of information provided on NBS Qualitative, quantitative, NABiophysical assessment Numeric value of biophysical flood reduction Runoff reduction valuesThe final database consists of a first part aimed at framing the studies in relation to acontextualization in temporal and spatial terms. Information considered relevant to graspthe background of this analysis of the study type, as well as the data used and providedby the peer-reviewed publications, have been included. The information on the appliedmethodology is useful to identify if and how the researchers implement NBS impactsassessment. The collected information on the data used serves to provide knowledgeof in which ways the analysis has been conducted. Therefore, based on the informationprovided, the studies were classified in qualitative, quantitative, mixed (both qualitativeand quantitative), or spatial analysis.The second part of the database includes three focus areas to be addressed by thisreview. The first focus area concerns the climate risk category, to understand the levelof integration in the literature in relation to the compound flood hazards in coastal cities.Within this area, data on the climate change perspective have been extracted to identifyhow this issue has been addressed by the researchers. This information was classifiedin ‘background’, where climate change has been just mentioned as a context, ‘analytical’,where climate change data were used in the analysis, and ‘scenarios’, where climate changeprojections were included in the assessment analysis. The second focus area concerns theeconomic category, by exploring how economic evaluation related to NBS implementationhas been addressed by the literature. This aspect includes economic assessments and thecurrency and unit used by the studies. Finally, the third focus is related to the climateadaptation challenge, namely, by comprehending how NBS implementation is integratedinto urban planning in practice. This category aims to identify the kind of biophysicalassessment employed by the studies, through the collection of information related to thespecific natural solutions implemented. This knowledge helps to classify the most-usedNBS, linked to their biophysical flood-mitigation values.3. Results and AnalysisData extraction from the three-step procedure covered both quantitative and somequalitative aspects. Section 3.1 presents a quantitative discussion about the results, asUrban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 6 of 23comparative descriptive analysis. Section 3.2 shows an in-depth analysis of the resultsin relation to the focus areas, by presenting, firstly, a background that frames the NBSstudies. The following sections represent an in-depth evaluation about the three emergentthemes this review analysis deals with: climate risk, the economic perspective, and theeconomic perspective.3.1. Statistical OverviewGiven the relatively large number of publications, when combining different searchesfrom the online databases, a first general overview as a statistical descriptive analysis hasbeen conducted. This summary starts by showing the evolution over time of publicationson ecosystem-based adaptation concepts related to flood issues that resulted from thefirst review step (N = 360). The bars show the number of publications per year, andthe dotted line represents the cumulative values of the studies until 2020. The numberof studies published on that topic have been rapidly increasing over the last couple ofdecades (Figure 2)—especially as of 2016. About 90% of publications are from the period of2013 to 2020.Urban Sci. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 24  the climate adaptation challenge, namely, by comprehending how NBS implementation is integrated into urban planning in practice. This category aims to identify the kind of biophysical assessment employed by the studies, through the collection of information related to the specific natural solutions implemented. This knowledge helps to classify the most-used NBS, linked to their biophysical flood-mitigation values. 3. Results and Analysis Data extraction from the three-step procedure covered both quantitative and some qualitative aspects. Section 3.1 presents a quantitative discussion about the results, as comparative descriptive analysis. Section 3.2 shows an in-depth analysis of the results in relation to the focus are s, b  presen ng, firstly, a b ckground that frames  NBS stud-ies. The following sections repres nt a  in-depth ev luati n about the three mergent hemes t is review analysis d als wi h: climate risk, the economic p rsp ctive, and the economic perspective. 3.1. Statistical Overview Given the relatively large number of publications, when combining different searches from the online databases, a first general overview as a statistical descriptive analysis has been conducted. This summary starts by showing the evolution over time of publications on ecosystem-based adaptation concepts related to flood issues that resulted from the first review step (N = 360). The bars show the number of publications per year, and the dotted line represents the cumulative values of the studies until 2020. The number of studies published on that topic have been rapidly increasing over the last couple of decades (Figure 2)—especially as of 2016. About 90% of publications are from the period of 2013 to 2020.  Figure 2. Publications per year with cumulative studies over time (N = 360). Looking at the distribution of publications over time, by nature-based adaptation ter-minologies (Figure 3), SuDS is the first term used in the literature (since 2002). The first two publications in 2002 concern more qualitative descriptions of SuDS, particularly on the application of permeable pavements. NBS and SC resulted in quite new concepts from 2015 and 2016, respectively. Publications on GI resulted in the largest number of studies, with a significant rise from 2012 to 2020. The publications are from 138 journals and 71 conference proceedings. Most of the studies (65%) are from three journals: Water (24%), Figure 2. Publications per year with cumulative studies over time (N = 360).Lo king at the istribution f lic ti s r ti , b nature-base adaptationterminologies (Figure 3), SuDS is the first term used in the literature (since 2002). Thefirst two publications in 2002 concern more qualitative descriptions of SuDS, particularlyon the application of permeable pavements. NBS and SC resulted in quite new conceptsfrom 2015 and 2016, respectively. Publications on GI resulted in the largest number ofstudies, with a significant rise from 2012 to 2020. The publications are from 138 journalsand 71 conference proceedings. Most of the studies (65%) are from three journals: Water(24%), which started to publish on this topic from 2014, and Sustainability (21%) and Scienceof the Total Environment (20%), which show first publications in 2016.Urban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 7 of 23Urban Sci. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 24  which started to publish on this topic from 2014, and Sustainability (21%) and Science of the Total Environment (20%), which show first publications in 2016.  Figure 3. Number of studies over time per generic nature-based adaptation (N = 360). The second review step highlighted that the GI concept has been extensively applied to urban flood adaptation in peer-reviewed studies, as compared to the other generic na-ture-based adaptation approaches (see Figure 4). The NBS concept is rapidly gaining in-terest over time, especially by framing the studies as research articles (64%), followed by the highest number of review articles (29%) among all the other generic nature-based con-cepts.  Figure 4. Number of publications per generic nature-based adaptation by study type (N = 157). However, the use of specific kinds of measures is not yet widely studied. By looking at Figure 5, “Pond” is the most popular solution (16 studies), followed by “Wetland” (15 studies) and “Green roof” (13 studies), even if relatively few studies examine the applica-tion of such measures. Figure 3. Number of studies over time per generic nature-based adaptation (N = 360).The second review step highlighted that the GI concept has been extensively applied tourban flood adaptation in peer-reviewed studies, as compared to the other generic nature-based adaptation approaches (see Figure 4). The NBS concept is rapidly gaining interestover time, especially by framing the studies as research articles (64%), followed by thehighest number of review articles (29%) among all the other generic nature-based concepts.Urban Sci. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 24  which started to publish on this topic from 2014, and Sustainability (21%) and Science of the Total Environment (20%), which show first publications in 2016.  Figure 3. Number of studies over time per generic nature-based adaptation (N = 360). The second review step highlighted that the GI concept has been extensively applied to urban flood adaptation in peer-reviewed studies, as compar d to the other generic na-ture-base   ap roaches (see Figur  4). The NBS concept is rapidly gai ing in-ter st over time, especi lly by fram ng the studies as research articles (64%), follow d by th  high st number of review articles (29%) among all t e other generic nature-based con-cepts.  Figure 4. Number of publications per generic nature-based adaptation by study type (N = 157). However, the use of specific kinds of measures is not yet widely studied. By looking at Figure 5, “Pond” is the most popular solution (16 studies), followed by “Wetland” (15 studies) and “Green roof” (13 studies), even if relatively few studies examine the applica-tion of such measures. Figure 4. Number of publications per generic nature-based adaptation by study type (N = 157).However, the use of specific kinds of measures is not yet widely studied. By lo kingat Figure , is the most popular solution (16 studies), f llowed by “Wetland”(15 studies) and “Green roof” (13 studies), even if relatively few studies xamine theapplication of such measures.Urban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 8 of 23Urban Sci. 20 2, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  of 24   Figure 5. The radar chart on keywords frequency (NBS type) in the documents (N = 157). 3.2. Background: Framimg the Application of NBS From a geographical perspective, about 8% concerns publications with a global scope. Only one publication concerning a conceptual framework is independent of geo-graphical context. The other studies, which are all reviews, employ data from different geographic areas. Most publications have applied case studies, as shown in Figure 6. The map illustrates the distribution of the NBS applications by showing the number of cases in relation to the spatial scale for each continent. The local level in Figure 6 includes dif-ferent larger scales of analysis, such as city level, neighbourhood level, district level, and catchment level. Around 40% of case studies cover European contexts, where only 3 ap-plications are at the national level, and 22 are at the local level. Among the applications at the local level in Europe, only seven cases are at the city level. Moreover, most of those cases are focused on flooding-related issues. The United Kingdom is the European coun-try that started earlier in the case-study application of natural-based approaches, in re-spect to other countries. Indeed, the first application dates from 2013. For NBS applica-tions in Asian and American countries, the percentage of coverage is almost the same (26% and 25%, respectively), while it is only 6% and 3%, respectively, in Oceanian and African countries. In relation to applications at the local scale in American countries, only five cases deepen the flooding-related issues, while the majority is focused on multiple haz-ards. There are even less for Asian countries, specifically China, where only three case studies work on a single hazard (flood). Figure 5. The radar chart on keywords frequency (NBS type) in the documents (N = 157).3.2. Background: Framimg the Application of NBSFrom a geographical perspective, about 8% concerns publications with a global scope.Only one publication concerning a conceptual framework is independent of geographicalcontext. The other studies, which are all reviews, employ data from different geographicareas. Most publications have applied case studies, as shown in Figure 6. The map illus-trates the distribution of the NBS applications by showing the number of cases in relationto the spatial scale for each continent. The local level in Figure 6 includes different largerscales of analysis, such as city level, neighbourhood level, district level, and catchmentlevel. Around 40% of case studies cover European contexts, where only 3 applicationsare at the national level, and 22 are at the local level. Among the applications at the locallevel in Europe, only seven cases are at the city level. Moreover, most of those cases arefocused on flooding-related issues. The United Kingdom is the European country thatstarted earlier in the case-study application of natural-based approaches, in respect to othercountries. Indeed, the first application dates from 2013. For NBS applications in Asianand American countries, the percentage of coverage is almost the same (26% and 25%,respectively), while it is only 6% and 3%, respectively, in Oceanian and African countries.In relation to applications at the local scale in American countries, only five cases deepenthe flooding-related issues, while the majority is focused on multiple hazards. There areeven less for Asian countries, specifically China, where only three case studies work on asingle hazard (flood).For the study types, most of the publications cover two different kinds of methodolo-gies (44%): review (15) and spatial assessment (15) (Figure 7). Among the review studies,53% provide qualitative data and can be divided into two subgroups. The first groupgives information based on surveys [32,33], while the second group builds on the currentevidence of NBS applications for flooding challenges [14,34–36]. Around 27% of reviewsprovide qualitative and quantitative data (mixed data) [37–39], while only 7% of reviewspresent quantitative information about the unit cost estimates for flood adaptation [40], and14% do not give any details (NA). The spatial assessment studies are quantitative (27%),quantitative and spatial (47%), mixed (13%), or mixed and spatial (13%).Urban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 9 of 23Urban Sci. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 24   Figure 6. Geographical distribution and scale of the NBS case studies identified in the rapid system-atic review. For the study types, most of the publications cover two different kinds of methodol-ogies (44%): review (15) and spatial assessment (15) (Figure 7). Among the review studies, 53% provide qualitative data and can be divided into two subgroups. The first group gives information based on surveys [32,33], while the second group builds on the current evi-dence of NBS applications for flooding challenges [14,34–36]. Around 27% of reviews pro-vide qualitative and quantitative data (mixed data) [37–39], while only 7% of reviews pre-sent quantitative information about the unit cost estimates for flood adaptation [40], and 14% do not give any details (NA). The spatial assessment studies are quantitative (27%), quantitative and spatial (47%), mixed (13%), or mixed and spatial (13%).  Figure 7. Kind of data provided by each study across different study type. Figure 6. Geographical distribution and scale of the NBS case studies identified in the rapidsystematic review.Urban Sci. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 24   Figure 6. Geographical distribution and scale of the NBS case studies identified in the rapid system-atic review. For the study types, most of the publications cover two different kinds of methodol-ogies (44%): review (15) and spatial assessment (15) (Figure 7). Among the review studies, 53% provide qualitative data and can be divided into two subgroups. The first group gives information based on surveys [32,33], while the second group builds on the current evi-dence of NBS applications for flooding challenges [14,34–36]. Around 27% of reviews pro-vide qualitative and quantitative data (mixed data) [37–39], while only 7% of reviews pre-sent quantitative information about the unit cost estimates for flood adaptation [40], and 14% do not give any details (NA). The spatial assessment studies are quantitative (27%), quantitative and spatial (47%), mixed (13%), or mixed and spatial (13%).  Figure 7. Kind of data provided by each study across different study type. Figure 7. Kind of data provided by each study across different study type.A large portion of publications (40%) covers two other study types, namely concep-tual/discussion (14) and modelling (13) studies (Figure 7). Most of the data and informationprovided by conceptual/discussion typology are qualitative (64%). One paper presentsa comparative analysis between SUDS and SCP in the UK and China, respectively, toidentify the barriers and enablers for the adoption of GI, through 12 in-depth semi struc-tured interviews with stakeholders [41]. Four publications describe case studies to testconceptual frameworks or demonstrate how research project collaborations addressedmany biophysical and socio-political barriers for the NBS applications [42–45]. Data frommodelling studies are mostly quantitative (38%) and quantitative and spatial (30%), witha few that are mixed (23%) and mixed and spatial (8%). Most modelling studies applyUrban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 10 of 23hydraulic models by estimating the NBS impacts without developing any economic assess-ment [46–49]. Porse [50] uses risk-based modelling to assess cost-effective (cost–benefitanalysis) urban-floodplain-development decisions by providing qualitative and quantita-tive data [50]. Schubert et al. [51] apply stormwater flow and quality modelling to assessthe GI impacts, by assuming fixed construction costs, which ignore the potential savingsresulting from the benefits of the measures’ implementation [51]. Alves et al. [52] develop amonetary analysis of different co-benefits related to the implementation of green-blue-greyinfrastructure. This study provides spatial data from the 2D hydrodynamic models, toassess the expected annual damage (EAD) for buildings, to finally obtain quantitative dataderived from the cost–benefit analysis of flood-risk mitigation measures, by comparing theexpected annual benefits and costs converted to the net present value [52].Few papers (9%) develop empirical studies. Of the remaining five theoretical frame-work papers (7%), different subjects have been covered. One study tests a conceptual modelto assess the groundwater table variation by providing both qualitative and quantitativedata on groundwater infiltration and storage capacity [53]. Two studies provide qualitativedata through the application of the analytical framework that conceptualizes ecosystem-based adaptation in urban environments and the employment of a HAMIED framework(Hydrological Assessment and Management of green Infrastructure to Enhance Decision-making) to systematically identify and manage the aspects that stakeholders would like tobe assessed using specific models within the SuDS system [54,55]. The other two studiesprovide quantitative data. One focuses on a new formula of resilience based on threeparts of system severity: social severity affected by urban flooding, environmental severitycaused by sewer overflow, and technological severity considering the safe operation ofdownstream facilities [56]. The other article presents an evaluation framework that aims toquantify the co-benefits of implemented NBS [57].3.2.1. Emergent Theme: Climate Change Perspective into NBS AnalysisThe first challenge identified concerns how climate change and which climatic riskswere addressed by NBS analysis. The level of integration of the climate change issue variesacross publications (Figure 8). Most of the studies (51%) show a low level of integrationrelated to the climate change concept into NBS analysis (‘background’ indicator). Of thosepublications that only mentioned climate change as a background condition, 21 are focusedon a single hazard (flooding) (e.g., [58–61]), while the rest (14 studies) are focused onmultiple hazards (flooding, drought, coastal erosion, heat island effect, air quality, etc.)(e.g., [14,34,55,62]). Those studies use the term climate change in at least one sectionof the publication (e.g., the title, abstract, keywords, introduction, methods, results ordiscussion/conclusion).Among the publications that do not mention climate change (34%), most (17 studies)analyse the flooding hazard (e.g., [63–65]), while the other six publications broadly mentionand focus on multiple hazards, by considering, especially, sea-level rise, air temperature,and drought (e.g., [44,45]).Only three studies show a medium level of integration of climate change issues (‘ana-lytical’ indicator; 4%). A review paper focuses on flooding as a single hazard, by discussinginternal and external aspects that are influencing flash flood events. Climate change isincluded as an external factor that induces heavy precipitation [66]. One paper focuses onmultiple hazards (flood and drought), while another study focuses on a compound hazard,by considering river–fluvial flooding, high tides, and sea-level rise [67,68].The seven studies that integrate climate change issues to a large extent consider climatedata to build different scenarios (‘scenario’ indicator; 10%). The major part of these studies(five) tackle a single hazard (flooding), while one article analyses flooding and sea-level riseas a compound hazard and one concerns multiple hazards (flood, drought, temperature,and sea-level rise) [47,56,69–73].Urban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 11 of 23Urban Sci. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 24   Figure 8. Level of integration of climate change issue into NBS studies. Among the publications that do not mention climate change (34%), most (17 studies) analyse the flooding hazard (e.g., [63–65]), while the other six publications broadly men-tion and focus on multiple hazards, by considering, especially, sea-level rise, air temper-ature, and drought (e.g., [44,45]). Only three studies show a medium level of integration of climate change issues (‘an-alytical’ indicator; 4%). A review paper focuses on flooding as a single hazard, by discuss-ing internal and external aspects that are influencing flash flood events. Climate change is included as an external factor that induces heavy precipitation [66]. One paper focuses on multiple hazards (flood and drought), while another study focuses on a compound haz-ard, by considering river–fluvial flooding, high tides, and sea-level rise [67,68]. The seven studies that integrate climate change issues to a large extent consider cli-mate data to build different scenarios (‘scenario’ indicator; 10%). The major part of these studies (five) tackle a single hazard (flooding), while one article analyses flooding and sea-level rise as a compound hazard and one concerns multiple hazards (flood, drought, tem-perature, and sea-level rise) [47,56,69–73]. 3.2.2. Emergent Theme: Economic Perspective into NBS Analysis For the second challenge, only 19 publications (28%) report on economic research approaches. Figure 9 shows the number of studies per each specific economic approach, by showing the currency employed. About 10% of the studies develop a flood-damage analysis. These studies use a flood-depth damage function to estimate the economic dam-ages—two studies use buildings and the other one works with income classes for flood-costs calculation [59,64,73]. The currency is mentioned in just one of these studies, which is GBP. Most of the publications (37%) develop cost analysis on NBS implementation to reduce flood risk. Three studies include construction and maintenance costs of NBS in the analysis by using USD [74,75] and GBP as currencies [76]. The other part of the studies include only the construction costs of the measures by using the currencies USD [56,69], RMB [77], or AUD [51], respectively. About 26% employ cost–benefit analysis (CBA) to conduct the economic calculation of NBS. One study is a review on the unit-cost infor-mation of adaptation measures, by including the currency GBP and USD [40]. Two publi-cations use EUR as the currency [52,70], while one economic assessment conducted in China is expressed in RMB [78]. Only one of those studies does not explicitly state the currency [71]. Among the remaining 20% of studies, one focuses on life-cycle cost analysis Figure 8. Level of integration of climate change issue into NBS studies.3.2.2. Emergent Theme: Economic Perspective into NBS AnalysisFor the second challenge, only 19 publications (28%) report on economic researchapproaches. Figure 9 shows the number of studies per each specific economic approach,by showing the currency employed. About 10% of the studies develop a flood-damageanalysis. These studies use a flood-depth damage function to estimate the economicdamages—two studies use buildings and the other one works with income classes forflood-costs calculation [59,64,73]. The currency is mentioned in just one of these studies,which is GBP. Most of the publications (37%) develop cost analysis on NBS implemen-tation to reduce flood risk. Three studies include construction and maintenance costs ofNBS in the analysis by sing USD [74,75] and GBP as currencies [76]. The other part ofthe studies include only the construction costs of the m asures by using the currenciesUSD [56,69], RMB [77], or AUD [51], respectively. About 26% employ cost–benefit analysis(CBA) to conduct the economic calculation of NBS. One study is a review on the unit-costinformation of adaptation measures, by including the currency GBP and USD [40]. Twopublications use EUR as the currency [52,70], while one economic assessment conductedin China is expressed in RMB [78]. Only one of those studi does not explicitly statethe currency [71]. Among the remaining 20% of studies, one focuses on life-cycle costanalysis (LCCA), by including USD [79] m and one conducts a value-transfer methodologyto monetize the natural capital (NC) benefits by using GBP [80]. The other two studies,which do not explicitly state the currency, show a historical comparison and a least-costpath analysis [61,66].Urban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 12 of 23Urban Sci. 2022, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 24  (LCCA), by including USD [79]m and one conducts a value-transfer methodology to mon-etize the natural capital (NC) benefits by using GBP [80]. The other two studies, which do not explicitly state the currency, show a historical comparison and a least-cost path anal-ysis [61,66].  Figure 9. Economic approaches and currency employed for each NBS study. 3.2.3. Emergent Theme: Adaptation Perspective into NBS Analysis Finally, the third theme addressed in this research is related to the adaptation chal-lenge, essentially by highlighting the biophysical assessment employed by the studies through the collection of the information related to the specific natural solutions imple-mented. Only 31 publications address this theme, which helps to classify the most used NBS types linked to their biophysical flood-mitigation values. Table 2 shows the number of times that each of the most common NBS are employed in the literature, addressing the different types of information (quantitative and/or qualitative) provided. Green roof and permeable paving are the mostly studied solutions, for which quantitative evidence is available. For example, most of the studies provide the numeric runoff-reduction values of flooding, as water infiltration or retention capacity in terms of percentage, mm, or m3 [59,78,81,82]. One study expresses the numeric flood-risk values related to the climate change mitigation in terms of kg of CO2 reduction [83]. Green roof and permeable paving studies are also the ones for which most qualitative evidence is available, followed by rain garden. The kind of evidence presented refers to qualitative ranking expressed in terms of reduction capacity (i.e., low–medium–good or including fixed values as 0–1), as devel-oped by the authors [63,76,84]. Green facade, green park, and green street are the less-studied solutions. In general, only a few studies provide both qualitative and quantitative information [65,85].   Figure 9. Economic approaches and currency employed for each NBS study.3.2.3. Emergent Theme: Adaptation Perspective into NBS AnalysisFinally, the third theme addressed in this research is related to the adaptation challenge,essentially by highlighting the biophysical assessment employed by the studies throughthe collection of the information rel ted to the specific natural solutions implemented.Only 31 publications address this theme, which helps to classify the most used NBS typeslinked to their biophysical flood-mitigation values. Table 2 shows the number of timesthat each of the most common NBS are employed in the literature, addressing the differenttypes of information (quantitative and/or qualitative) provided. Green roof and permeablepaving are the mostly studied solutions, f r which quantitative evidence is available. Forexample, most of the studies provide the numeric runoff-reduction values of flooding, aswater infiltration or retention capacity in terms of percentage, mm, or m3 [59,78,81,82]. Onestudy expresses the numeric flood-risk values related to the climate change mitigationin terms of kg of CO2 reduction [83]. Green roof and permeable paving studies are alsothe o es for which most qualitative evidence is available, followed by rain garden. Thekind of evidence presented refers to qualitative ranking express in terms of reductioncapacity (i.e., low–medium–good or including fixed values as 0–1), as developed by theauthors [63,76,84]. Green facade, green park, and green street are the less-studied solutions.In general, only a few studies provide both qualitative and quantitative information [65,85].Urban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 13 of 23Table 2. Number of times that specific NBS address different types of information. Colours vary fromred (none or a few times) to green (several to most of the time).Type of Information on NBSNo. of Times NBS is Studied Quantitative Qualitative Quantitative andQualitative NAGreen facade 2 1 0 1 0Green park 3 0 2 1 0Green street 3 0 1 2 0Green roof 20 10 7 2 1Infiltration basin 10 6 2 2 0Permeable paving 19 10 7 2 0Pond 10 3 5 1 1Rain garden 11 4 6 1 0Swale 11 4 5 1 1Wetland 9 3 4 2 0Note: -Dark red is associated to a low level of times in which NBS address different type pf information. Movingto even more lighter red, orange, yellow and finally light green and dark green where NBS address several ormost of the time these different kind of information.4. DiscussionWhat emerges from this literature review are research gaps for each of the deepenedfocus areas and an overall lack of studies integrating the three themes together. The firsttheme about climate hazard and the level of integration of climate change issues intoNBS analysis, essentially highlights the gaps in the two fields. One is related to gaps onvulnerability and risk assessment, due to the compound effects of urban flooding andstorm surges. Generally, compound climate events are an integral part of almost all climate-related risks and pose significant challenges to many risk-reduction measures [86]. Bettercomprehension of compound events is crucial for improving risk assessment and definingsite-specific NBS to reduce the associated impacts [86,87]. Moreover, a small portion of theliterature works with climate change scenarios. The level of integration of climate changedata into analyses is weak, even though defining scenarios is a useful tool to visualizepotential futures and to address the related trade-offs [88].For the second theme, the first issue that can be pointed out is related to the kind ofeconomic assessment employed. Some studies are unclear as to which currency has beenemployed to address the economic evaluation. In addition, the reference year associatedto the analysis is specified only a few times. This shows the important role in economicanalysis of clarifying this information, thus helping to build useful and consistent data forfurther implementation. Another issue is linked to the cost components or cost–benefitanalysis, which should be addressed. Uncertainties are associated with the NBS cost ofoperation and maintenance, while NBS benefits are often not clarified and partial. Futureresearch should address these issues and expand the research by estimating both the costand benefits of flood adaptation measures.Finally, some gaps should be addressed on the third focus area concerning the adapta-tion theme. Urban planning is the process of developing and designing urban areas to meetthe needs of a community. Among the different disciplines—architecture, engineering,economics, sociology, public health, finance, etc.—involved in planning, few of them havebeen prioritized in the process of NBS promotion. Some studies highlighted the socialdimension by fostering stakeholder involvement and participatory planning to identify co-benefits and barriers in the process of NBS integration into urban adaptation, e.g., [32,39,54].However, most of them underlined the need to cover the economic and finance area ofplanning. These focused on broadly proving multiple co-benefits versus different barri-ers in NBS implementation, as compared to traditional solutions such as [45,56,72]. Fewstudies highlighted the relevant role of evaluative tools (such as cost–benefit analysis)to support the decision-making process in planning, as in [70,83]. The lack of studies inUrban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 14 of 23this field is probably related to the scarcity of biophysical studies that assess the multipleimpacts of NBS, which underpin such analyses. What emerges as one of the most importantbarriers to increased implementation of NBS is related to finance, both in upfront andmaintenance costs, as in [41,89]. Thus, filling these gaps through long-term monitoringand demonstration of impacts and benefits of NBS helps to overcome such barriers andpromote implementation of NBS. Additionally, specific vegetation information has notbeen mentioned, even though it plays a crucial role when considering climate change. Thechoice of specific NBS should be strictly related to the vegetation type to be effective. Arepository concerning the technical aspects (as dimensions) of each specific NBS is alsostill missing.Through this review, it is possible to infer that a large number of studies only partlyassess the biophysical and economic impacts of NBS scenarios’ implementation. Moreover,most of the studies do not mention specific practices or procedures to systematically con-duct biophysical–economic assessment on NBS scenarios’ implementation. Many attemptsat ecosystem services (ES) quantification and NBS biophysical benefit evaluation, for theirinclusion into the decision-making process, have been carried out [90]. Moreover, a greatnumber of NBS studies on flood vulnerability concerns engineering aspects (hydraulic mod-elling assessment). However, it is argued that developing this kind of analysis as standaloneis not enough for mainstreaming wider implementation of NBS. Especially, under changingclimate conditions, it is urgent to focus on spatially integrated environmental–economicassessments of NBS, by simulating climate change and adaptation scenarios.Given the relevance of NBS in the execution of the United Nations (UN) Sustain-able Development Goals (SDGs; https://sdgs.un.org/goals (accessed on 14 July 2022)),in particular SDG 11 (sustainable cities and communities) and SDG 13 (climate action),it becomes even more important to contribute to overcome barriers that hamper a widerNBS implementation. An essential aspect derived by this review is related to how climateadaptation through nature-based implementation is integrated into traditional urban plan-ning. This is related to the disciplines involved in the planning and implementation of suchadaptation measures. Some studies focus on presenting and evaluating perceived barriersto NBS implementation, which are compared a few times to the potential benefits, mainlyrelated to increasing urban ES, as in [29,42,60,61,81]. Another part of the publications showsmethodological frameworks and evaluative tools, by working with adaptation scenarios tohelp local governments, as in [49,59,74,85]. One study highlighted the crucial role of CBAas a relevant tool for decision-making for urban planning, by comparing different scenariosof adaptation and future climate [70]. These aspects are essential strategies towards morestructural incorporation of NBS in urban planning. However, a widespread implementationof NBS still remains limited by the lack of knowledge about how to embed urban ecologicalscience within urban-planning practices and policies [91]. For instance, the uncertainty andlack of information on NBS’ long-term behaviour and effects, together with the difficulty ofquantitatively assessing their multidimensional impacts.This rapid systematic review is not lacking shortcomings. Firstly, the number ofpublications included come from two electronic databases (Scopus and Web of Science)and may exclude some other important publications that are not stored in those databases.Secondly, the data extracted are also limited by the areas that this study focuses on. Rather,a reflection of the emergent themes has been carried out, even though the lack of climate,biophysical, and economic data for some cases undermined the comparison between thedifferent studies.5. ConclusionsResearch interest and efforts to evaluate NBS impacts has been growing rapidly overthe last decade. So far, current approaches for NBS impacts assessment are diverse and oftenvague, especially in relation to the idea of integrating NBS into the planning process. Thisreview, therefore, aims to systematically analyse how NBS biophysical performance andeconomic impact evaluations are developed and integrated into urban planning adaptation.Urban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 15 of 23The four focus themes identified by the review process provide a basis for the discussionaround the role of NBS in climate change adaptation for flood issues in coastal cities.This study contributes to the existing body of knowledge, especially by highlightingthe emergent importance of NBS in flooding-related urban planning and the lack of spatiallyexplicit simulation and economic assessment. Indeed, the NBS approach helps with urban-flood management and, especially, dealing with the more extreme flooding events due toclimate change. For this reason, the information extracted by this review can be usefulfor future studies that focus on comparative discussion of NBS application and economicassessment employed for urban-flood management.Looking at the results from an integrated perspective, which combines climate andeconomic analysis by overcoming the boundaries of adaptation planning, it seems tobecome even more important to conduct studies on integrated assessment methods forpolicy support. This would help delineate future research aimed at assessing the signif-icant role of NBS to reduce the biophysical and economic impacts of flood events. Suchresearch reflects the growing interest in further research to develop spatially integratedenvironmental–economic assessments on NBS implementation, by underlining the needfor trans-disciplinary approaches to provide science-based evaluations supporting policy-making in the framework of urban climate change adaptation. By further performingin-depth analyses to demonstrate the multiple costs and (co-)benefits of NBS, as comparedto traditional approaches, will help to better integrate such solutions into traditional ur-ban planning. Once sufficient studies are available, meta-analyses can be performed toderive conclusions about the factors and conditions that determine the effectiveness ofNBS. Based on this consideration, further research on the role of specific vegetation andon the interaction between plants and substrate, should be developed to optimize theNBS’ efficacy.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, C.Q. and P.R.; methodology, P.R. and C.Q.; formal anal-ysis, C.Q., P.R., E.C., A.P., and R.M.; data curation, C.Q.; writing—original draft preparation, C.Q.;writing—review and editing, P.R., E.C., A.P., and R.M.; visualization, C.Q.; supervision, P.R. and E.C.All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This research received funding from Politecnico di Torino.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.Acknowledgments: This study was supported by the UNaLab project, Grant Agreement No. 730052,Topic: SCC-2-2016-2017: Smart Cities and Communities Nature-based solutions. Thanks are alsodue to FCT/MCTES for the financial support to CESAM (UIDB/50017/2020 and UIDP/50017/2020),through national funds and co-funding by European funds when applicable. Thanks to Politecnico diTorino that supported the APC of this research with the research funds.Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.Appendix AReference Authors Title Year Journal[45]Connop S., Vandergert P.,Eisenberg B., Collier M.J., Nash C.,Clough J., Newport D.Renaturing cities using aregionally-focused biodiversity-ledmultifunctional benefits approach tourban green infrastructure2016 Environmental Scienceand Policy[83] Senosiain J.L.Urban regreeneration: Green urbaninfrastructure as a response to climatechange mitigation and adaptation2020International Journal ofDesign and Nature andEcodynamicsUrban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 16 of 23Reference Authors Title Year Journal[75] Karamouz M., Heydari Z.Conceptual Design Frameworkfor Coastal Flood BestManagement Practices2020 Journal of Water ResourcesPlanning and Management[84]Chan F.K.S., Griffiths J.A.,Higgitt D., Xu S., Zhu F.,Tang Y.-T., Xu Y., Thorne C.R.“Sponge City” in China—Abreakthrough of planning and floodrisk management in the urban context2018 Land Use Policy[47] Boelee E., Janse J., Le Gal A.,Kok M., Alkemade R., Ligtvoet W.Overcoming water challenges throughnature-based solutions 2017 Water Policy[63] Alves A., Gómez J.P., Vojinovic Z.,Sánchez A., Weesakul S.Combining co-benefits andstakeholders perceptions into greeninfrastructure selection forflood risk reduction2018 Environments[68] Duy P.N., Chapman L., Tight M.,Linh P.N., Thuong L.V.Increasing vulnerability to floods innew development areas: evidencefrom Ho Chi Minh City2018International Journal ofClimate Change Strategiesand Management[64]Bertilsson L., Wiklund K.,de Moura Tebaldi I.,Rezende O.M., Veról A.P.,Miguez M.G.Urban flood resilience—Amulti-criteria index to integrate floodresilience into urban planning2019 Journal of Hydrology[58] Sörensen J., Emilsson T.Evaluating flood risk reduction byurban blue-green infrastructure usinginsurance data2019 Journal of Water ResourcesPlanning and Management[32] O’Donnell E.C., Lamond J.E.,Thorne C.R.Recognising barriers toimplementation of Blue-GreenInfrastructure: a Newcastle case study2017 Urban Water Journal[54]El Hattab M.H.,Theodoropoulos G.,Rong X., Mijic A.Applying the systems approach todecompose the SuDS decision-makingprocess for appropriate hydrologicmodel selection2020 Water[39] O’Sullivan J.J., Bruen M.,Purcell P.J., Gebre F.Urban drainage inIreland—embracingsustainable systems2012 Water andEnvironment Journal[49] Ramírez J.I., Qi K., Xiaobo L. Sustainable stormwater managementin Yinchuan New Town 2016Water Practiceand Technology[56] Dong X., Guo H., Zeng S.Enhancing future resilience in urbandrainage system: Green versusgrey infrastructure2017 Water Research[92] Hasala D., Supak S., Rivers L.Green infrastructure site selection inthe Walnut Creek wetland community:A case study from southeast Raleigh,North Carolina2020 Landscape andUrban Planning[72] Kunapo J., Fletcher T.D., LadsonA.R., Cunningham L., Burns M.J.A spatially explicit framework forclimate adaptation 2018 Urban Water Journal[38]Butt N., Shanahan D.F.,Shumway N., Bekessy S.A.,Fuller R.A., Watson J.E.M.,Maggini R., Hole D.G.Opportunities for biodiversityconservation as cities adapt toclimate change2018 Geo: Geographyand Environment[67] Pimentel-Rodrigues C.,Silva-Afonso A.Adaptation measures to climatechange. Integration of green roofswith rainwater harvesting systems2018WSEAS Transactionson Environmentand Development[51] Schubert J.E., Burns M.J.,Fletcher T.D., Sanders B.F.A framework for the case-specificassessment of Green Infrastructure inmitigating urban flood hazards2017 Advances in Water Resources[74]Zidar K., Belliveau-Nance M.,Cucchi A., Denk D., Kricun A.,O’Rourke S., Rahman S.,Rangarajan S., Rothstein E.,Shih J., Montalto F.A framework for multifunctionalgreen infrastructure investment inCamden, NJ2017 Urban PlanningUrban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 17 of 23Reference Authors Title Year Journal[79] Xie J., Chen H., Liao Z., Gu X.,Zhu D., Zhang J.An integrated assessment of urbanflooding mitigation strategies forrobust decision making2017 Environmental Modellingand Software[85] Voskamp I.M., Van de Ven F.H.M.Planning support system for climateadaptation: Composing effective setsof blue-green measures to reduceurban vulnerability to extremeweather events2015 Building and Environment[93] Farrugia S., Hudson M.D.,McCulloch L.An evaluation of flood control andurban cooling ecosystem servicesdelivered by urban greeninfrastructure2013International Journal ofBiodiversity Science,Ecosystem Servicesand Management[48] Rozos E., Makropoulos C.,Maksimović Č.Rethinking urban areas: An exampleof an integrated blue-green approach 2013Water Science andTechnology: Water Supply[33] Xie X., Qin S., Gou Z., Yi M.Engaging professionals in urbanstormwater management: the case ofChina’s Sponge City2020 Building Researchand Information[77] Bu J., Peng C., Li C., Wang X.,Zhang Y., Yang Z., Cai Y.A method for determining reasonablewater area ratio based on flood riskand cost-effectiveness in Rainy City2020 EnvironmentalEarth Sciences[66] Wu H.-L., Cheng W.-C., Shen S.-L.,Lin M.-Y., Arulrajah A.Variation of hydro-environmentduring past four decades withunderground sponge city planning tocontrol flash floods in Wuhan, China:An overview2020 Underground Space (China)[53] Lancia M., Zheng C., He X.,Lerner D.N., Andrews C., Tian Y.Hydrogeological constraints andopportunities for “Sponge City”development: Shenzhen,southern China2020 Journal of Hydrology:Regional Studies[36]Rubinato M., Nichols A., Peng Y.,Zhang J.-M., Lashford C., Cai Y.-P.,Lin P.-Z., Tait S.Urban and river flooding: Comparisonof flood risk management approachesin the UK and China and anassessment of future knowledge needs2019 Water Scienceand Engineering[42] O’Donnell E.C., Thorne C.R.,Yeakley J.A., Chan F.K.S.Sustainable Flood Risk andStormwater Management inBlue-Green Cities; an InterdisciplinaryCase Study in Portland, Oregon2020 Journal of the AmericanWater Resources Association[43]Lawson E., Thorne C., Ahilan S.,Allen D., Arthur S., Everett G.,Fenner R., Glenis V., Guan D.,Hoang L., Kilsby C., Lamond J.,Mant J., Maskrey S., Mount N.,Sleigh A., Smith L., Wright N.Delivering and evaluating themultiple flood risk benefits inBlue-Green cities: Aninterdisciplinary approach2014 WIT Transactions on Ecologyand the Environment[71]Kirshen P., Borrelli M., Byrnes J.,Chen R., Lockwood L., Watson C.,Starbuck K., Wiggin J., Novelly A.,Uiterwyk K., Thurson K.,McMann B., Foster C., Sprague H.,Roberts H.J., Bosma K.,Jin D., Herst R.Integrated assessment of storm surgebarrier systems under present andfuture climates and comparison toalternatives: a case study ofBoston, USA2020 Climatic Change[94] Lafortezza R., Sanesi G. Nature-based solutions: Settling theissue of sustainable urbanization 2019 Environmental Research[57]Watkin L.J., Ruangpan L.,Vojinovic Z., Weesakul S.,Torres A.S.A framework for assessing benefits ofimplemented nature-based solutions 2019 Sustainability[95] Sutton-Grier A.E., Sandifer P.A.Conservation of Wetlands and OtherCoastal Ecosystems: a Commentaryon their Value to Protect Biodiversity,Reduce Disaster Impacts, and PromoteHuman Health and Well-Being2019 WetlandsUrban Sci. 2022, 6, 53 18 of 23Reference Authors Title Year Journal[89]Huang, YJ; Tian, Z; Ke, Q; Liu, JG;Irannezhad, M; Fan, DL; Hou, MF;Sun, LXNature-based solutions for urbanpluvial flood risk management 2020 Water[80] Gunasekara R., Pecnik G.,Girvan M., De La Rosa T.Delivering integrated watermanagement benefits: The North WestBicester development, UK2018Proceedings of the Institutionof Civil Engineers:Water Management[61] Diaz-Nieto J., Lerner D.N.,Saul A.J.Least-cost path analysis to identifyretrofit surface-waterconveyance solutions2016 Journal of HydrologicEngineering[73] Jenkins K., Surminski S., Hall J.,Crick F.Assessing surface water flood risk andmanagement strategies under futureclimate change: Insights from anAgent-Based Model2017 Science of theTotal Environment[96] Li L., Uyttenhove P.,Van Eetvelde V.Planning green infrastructure tomitigate urban surface water floodingrisk—A methodology to identifypriority areas applied in thecity of Ghent2020 Landscape andUrban Planning[52] Alves A., Gersonius B., Kapelan Z.,Vojinovic Z., Sanchez A.Assessing the Co-Benefits ofgreen-blue-grey infrastructure forsustainable urban floodrisk management2019 Journal of EnvironmentalManagement[46]Fenner R., O’Donnell E., Ahilan S.,Dawson D., Kapetas L.,Kr