Techno-economic analysis of a sCO2 power plant for waste heat recovery in steel industry

Available online at www.sciencedirect.comaseiapmtScienceDirectEnergy Reports 6 (2020) 298–304www.elsevier.com/locate/egyr7th International Conference on Energy and Environment Research, ICEER 2020, 14–18September, ISEP, Porto, PortugalTechno-economic analysis of a sCO2 power plant for waste heatrecovery in steel industryMatteo Biondi, Ambra Giovannelli∗, Giuseppina Di Lorenzo, Coriolano SalviniDepartment of Engineering, University of Roma Tre, Via della Vasca Navale 79, 00146 Rome, ItalyReceived 1 November 2020; accepted 15 November 2020AbstractIndustrial facilities release a large amount of heat as a by-product of their processes. To improve environmental performancend increase process profitability, a portion of the waste heat can be recovered and employed for power generation by recoveryystems. Supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2) plants are emerging as potential alternatives to the well-established technologiesfor waste heat recovery (WHR) power generation in heavy industry. This paper offers a preliminary techno-economic analysisof a waste heat-to-power system based on a sCO2 closed-loop for a heavy-industrial process.By conducting a parametric investigation on the WHR sCO2 system’s key design parameters, a number of preferableconfigurations from a thermodynamic perspective were initially identified; they were subsequently analyzed from the economicpoint of view in terms of net present value (NPV) and pay-back period (PBP). The privileged WHR system configurationachieved an overall efficiency of 30.4% and a power output of 21.6 kWe, providing an NPV of almost US k$ 376 with a PBPof approximately 4.5 years.c⃝ 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 7th International Conference on Energy and Environment Research, ICEER, 2020.Keywords: Supercritical carbon dioxide; Waste heat recovery; Techno-economic analysis; Power production; Heat-to-power1. IntroductionHarnessing industrial process waste heat, which would otherwise remain unexploited, could lead to significantnergy savings for the industrial sector, a considerable reduction of fossil fuel use and, consequently, a deep cutn environmental pollutant emissions [1,2]. For instance, it was assessed that before the pandemic, in Europelmost 26% of primary energy was wasted in industrial processes as rejected heat, i.e. approximately a theoreticalotential of 920 TWh, and a Carnot potential of 279 TWh [3]. Similar scenarios, however, were highlighted inost of the developed countries worldwide [2]. In Europe, approximately 124 TWh/year was made available atemperatures over 500 ◦C [4], and it was suggested to boost recovery systems for waste-to-power applications.∗ Corresponding author.E-mail address: ambra.giovannelli@uniroma3.it (A. Giovannelli).https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2020.11.1472352-4847/ c⃝ 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 7th International Conference on Energy and Environment Research, ICEER,2020.M. Biondi, A. Giovannelli, G. Di Lorenzo et al. Energy Reports 6 (2020) 298–304aiaebofwηCurrently, conventional technologies applied to waste heat-to power systems are Organic Rankine Cycles (ORC)and Steam power plants. ORCs match well with energy sources at low/medium temperatures (generally lower than400 ◦C), while steam plants are usually fit for energy sources at medium/high temperature and medium/large wasteheat potentials. Therefore steam plants do not usually suit with small/medium applications.In the last years, supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2) closed-loop systems have been taken into consideration asvalid alternative to conventional options, mainly for small-medium industrial WHR plants [5]. sCO2 cycles havehigh efficiency. They use an inert fluid and can be operated with compact equipment and turbomachinery.Results of previous studies regarding the applicability of sCO2 technologies in the WHR field [6–9] suggestthat sCO2 cycles can represent an appealing alternative to conventional options especially when a small waste heatpotential is available at temperatures over 400 ◦C.The main attraction of this technology derives from the chemical and physical properties of the working fluid.Compared to organic compounds, sCO2 is not flammable and is more stable from a chemical perspective. Moreover,these systems are characterized by high performance (i.e., a significant increase in the power output and the cycle’sthermal efficiency resulting from a substantial reduction in compression work), reduced carbon footprint and waterconsumption. However some significant challenges to the full development, commercialization and deployment ofthis technology still exist [6].This work investigates the techno-economic feasibility of a simple-recuperated sCO2 Brayton cycle system (RBC)integrated with a waste heat source from a real industrial steelmaking site. The work highlights some relevantaspects, and it provides insight into the potential role of sCO2 cycles as a profitable option for heat-to-powerconversion. The results offer valuable information regarding how key design inputs impact heat-to-power technicalpotential and economic performance, which will guide the design process as sCO2 cycle technology increasinglyprogresses to commercial scales.2. Case studyThe reference industrial plant is a cast-iron cookware facility in operation for 4000 hr/year (16 hours/day)where several processes are carried out (e.g., metal casting, molding, sand preparation and surface treatments,enameling). The WHR focuses on the enamel coating process, which typically provides flues at 450–650 ◦C.Electricity consumption for the induction furnace was estimated to be approximately 4 TWh/year, and the enamelkilns’ gas consumption was almost 10 TWh/year.Based on the literature results [10,11], the sCO2 recuperated Brayton cycle (RBC) was selected as a prospectiveWHR unit for the considered industrial facility. The RBC has a simple plant layout and allows broader exploitation ofthe waste heat potential (WHP) than more complex cycles (e.g., recompressed Brayton cycle). A schematic diagramof the plant is shown in Fig. 1. The system consists of five basic components: main compressor, recuperator, primaryheater, turbine and cooler. The cycle process is as follows: the working fluid is first compressed to high pressureand is subsequently preheated (by recovering a considerable portion of the heat available at the turbine exit) inthe recuperator; in the primary heater, the fluid receives heat from flue gases, and it enters the turbine at hightemperature and high pressure to generate power; the low-pressure fluid at the turbine exit is then delivered intothe recuperator to release heat and is finally cooled to begin a new cycle.3. Techno-economic analysisThermodynamic and economic models of the key sCO2 system units were developed and implemented in ann-house tool. For a given waste heat potential, the tool can evaluate the thermodynamic states at the main stationsnd the overall cycle performance, setting minimum and maximum pressures and temperatures, turbomachineryfficiencies, and heat exchangers pressure drops. The evaluation of the heat transfer in the heat exchangers wasased on the log mean temperature difference (LMTD) method. Moreover, the tool can evaluate costs (capital andperating costs) associated with the specific configuration.From the thermodynamic point of view, the expected power output of the recovery plant can be expressed asollows:P = QWHPηWRηth (1)here QWHP is the kilns’ waste heat potential made available at the primary heater, ηWHR the WHR efficiency, andth the cycle thermodynamic efficiency, respectively. ηWHR is a fundamental parameter for the evaluation of the299M. Biondi, A. Giovannelli, G. Di Lorenzo et al. Energy Reports 6 (2020) 298–304wtaobswdfFig. 1. Simplified schematic of the sCO2 RBC.waste heat-to-power system because it is directly linked to the cycle’s power output, and it is defined as the ratiobetween the heat extracted from the flue gases and the waste heat potential (Eq. (2)):ηWHR =QextractedQWHP(2)For a given WHP, the best performing layout is, in general, the one that maximizes the product between ηWHRand ηth, and a simple RBC fits well with such a characteristic without increasing the complexity of the WHR systemas well.The capital cost evaluation of the power plant was performed using a bottom-up approach. The cost of the keycomponents (indicated in the following as C) was estimated according to the following equations retrieved fromthe literature [12–14]:Ccomp =71.1ṁ0.9 − ηcomprβcompr ln βcompr compressor (3)Cturb =479.34ṁ0.92 − ηturbβturb(1 + e(0.036TIT−54.4))turbine (4)Cgen = 60 P0.95e generator (5)CHE = γ (UA) heat exchangers (6)here ṁ, η, β and TIT are the mass flow rate, turbomachine isentropic efficiency, turbomachine pressure ratio andurbine inlet temperature, respectively. Pe, U and A stand for electrical power output, overall heat transfer coefficientnd heat transfer area, respectively. γ is the cost of the heat exchanger per unit of the product UA. Its value dependsn the type of heat exchanger taken into consideration.The resulting overall capital cost, given by the sum of the single abovementioned component costs, was increasedy a factor (Cia) to account for installation and auxiliary equipment costs.The yearly operating and maintenance costs were estimated according to the relationship proposed by previoustudies [11]:COMk = Pe[cOM (1 + er)k](7)here cOM are the operating costs per unit of installed electric power, and ‘er’ is the escalation rate of these costsue to equipment degradation and maintenance over time.Considering the system small size (approximately 200 kWe of net output power) and the relatively large industrialacility size (4 x 106 kWh of electricity consumption per year), the electricity produced is assumed to be used by300M. Biondi, A. Giovannelli, G. Di Lorenzo et al. Energy Reports 6 (2020) 298–304(cwTrrieaPpadfrc8polthe industrial facility itself and not sold to the grid. This assumption allows one to omit taxes in the cash flowcalculation because no net profit is associated with the WHR system operation.The plant’s economic viability was primarily analyzed in terms of net present value (NPV) and pay-back periodPBP), two criteria widely used in assessing the economic competitiveness of novel and conventional energyonversion systems [15–17]. Whereas NPV quantifies a project’s potential profit, PBP indicates the duration forhich cash invested in the project is exposed to risk.In light of the aforementioned assumption (i.e., the electricity generated by the sCO2 WHR system exploited bythe industrial facility), it is quite evident that the NPV is not a measure of a new revenue stream for the steelmakingfacility but rather of the expected cost savings following a reduction in electricity purchase from the grid over theentire operative lifespan of the plant.4. Results and discussionThe reference industrial plant makes available at the enamel kilns flue gases at an average temperature of 550 ◦C.he estimated WHP is approximately 1.25 MWth.The thermodynamic performance of the sCO2 power cycle was preliminarily evaluated using the input dataeported in Table 1. To explore the design space and achieve some information about the effect of cycle pressureatio and mass flow rate on the WHR system power output, a parametric analysis of the RBC was carried out. Thenfluence of the two abovementioned parameters was compared mainly in terms of net electrical output Pe, WHRfficiency ηWHR and thermal efficiency ηth. At this stage of the analysis, the isentropic efficiency of turbomachinerynd pressure drops of heat exchangers were assumed constant, as reported in Table 1.Table 1. Key technical input data for the parametricanalysis.Input parameter ValueMinimum cycle pressure 8.5 MPaTurbine isentropic efficiency 90%Compressor isentropic efficiency 85%Heat Exchangers pressure drop 2%Minimum Cycle Temperature 37 ◦C∆Tua 20 ◦CWHR inlet temperature (sCO2) 270 ◦CaDifference between the temperature of flue gases andsCO2 temperature at WHR inlet section.Results are reported in Fig. 2, arranged in three groups, one for each maximum pressure of the cycle taken intoconsideration (25, 30 and 35 MPa). For each group, the reference sCO2 mass flow rate was taken as the secondparameter, and it was increased from left to right (from 2 to 2.33 kg/s). Consequently, the maximum temperatureof the cycle decreases (from 500 ◦C to 475 ◦C approximately), since the WHR potential is assumed.It is relevant to highlight that, for each maximum pressure, the higher the mass flow rate, the higher Pe. Althoughe raises with the maximum pressure of the cycle, it is possible to conclude that the selection of high maximumressures is not recommended. For this specific case study, an increase of 10 MPa (from 25 to 35 MPa) brings aboutn increment of Pe of almost 18%. However, it would involve to severe technical challenges for the appropriateesign of some plant components.From the results of the first part of the parametric analysis, the best performing cycles in terms of power outputor each maximum pressure were selected for further analysis (namely cycles D, H and N for 25, 30 and 35 MPa,espectively). To explore the impact of machinery performance on the economic indexes, a parametric analysis wasarried out varying the compressor isentropic efficiency from 75 to 85% and the turbine isentropic efficiency from0% to 90%, as reported in Table 2. For the sake of simplicity, Fig. 3 reports the results only in terms of economicerformance (NPV and PBP for each case). The values of the main economic parameters applied to the evaluationf the WHR system cash flows and costs uncertainties of the models are summarized in Table 3.The achieved economic results highlight that NPV and PBP evaluated through economic correlations reported initerature are remarkably affected by machines’ efficiency, while the cycle maximum pressure is not relevant as the301M. Biondi, A. Giovannelli, G. Di Lorenzo et al. Energy Reports 6 (2020) 298–304Fig. 2. Main results of the thermodynamic parametric analysis varying maximum pressure and cycle mass flow rate.Table 2. Machinery performance for each group of RBCs.Case Compressor isentropicefficiency [%]Turbine isentropicefficiency [%]1 85 902 82.5 87.53 80 854 77.5 82.55 75 80Table 3. Key economic assumptions.Input parameter ValueInflation rate 5%Operating costs (cOM) 30 $/kWeIncrease of capital costs (Cia) 30%Escalation rate 3%Degradation rate 1%Cost of electricity (ce) 8 c$/kWhPlant life 20 yearsOperating hours 4000 hours/yearRatio between salvage revenue and total capital costs 5%Capital costs uncertainties +50%/−30%Operating costs uncertainties +10%/−10/variation of NPV and PBP is negligible in comparison with the model uncertainties on costs estimations. Therefore,solutions at lower pressures (i.e. 25 MPa instead of 30 or 35 MPa), and lower machinery efficiency seem those tobe privileged. However, a more accurate investigation of the reliability of capital costs correlations for sCO2 plantsreported in the literature is suggested. In fact, it is beyond doubt that information coming from the realization ofnew prototypes for the plant key components will help the setup of more specific models, improving the reliabilityof economic investigations for sCO systems.2302M. Biondi, A. Giovannelli, G. Di Lorenzo et al. Energy Reports 6 (2020) 298–304Fig. 3. Main results of the economic parametric analysis varying machines’ efficiencies.5. ConclusionThis paper offered a WHR solution to an industrial steelmaking industry sector site, taking into considerationthe technology’s performance and prevailing operating site conditions. The integration of the sCO2 plant with theindustrial facility was assessed by a parametric investigation to determine the most commercially attractive WHRsystem configuration. The effect of the cycle maximum pressure and machinery performance were considered. Inthe range of investigation, a NPV from 234 to 375 US k$ was found. The technology is expected to be appealingfor potential investors because PBPs were estimated from 4.2 to 7.6 years based on 4000 plant operating hours peryear.However, the estimation of capital costs for sCO2 plants should be investigated more accurately, mainly updatingthem through data coming from the on-going activities on new prototypes.Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that couldhave appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.AcknowledgmentsThe authors want to acknowledge the European Turbine Network (ETN) association and the University of RomaTre, Italy for their kind support.References[1] SETIS (Strategic Energy Technologies Information System). Web site, https://setis.ec.europa.eu/publications/setis-magazine/low-carbon-heating-cooling/valorisation-of-waste-heat-industrial. 2020, [Last access October 20th, 2020].[2] IEA (International Energy Agency). Tracking industry 2020; web-site https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-industry-2020. 2020, [Lastaccess October 14th].[3] Bianchi G, Panayiotou GP, Aresti L, Kalogirou SA, Florides GA, Tsamos K, Tassou SA, Christodoulides P. Estimating the waste heatrecovery in the European Union Industry. Energy, Ecol Environ 2019;4(5):211–21.[4] Papapetrou M, Kosmadakis G, Cipollina A, La Commare U, Micalea G. Industrial waste heat: Estimation of the technically resourcein the EU per industrial sector, temperature level and country. Appl Therm Eng 2018;138:207–16.303M. Biondi, A. Giovannelli, G. Di Lorenzo et al. Energy Reports 6 (2020) 298–304[5] Danieli P, Rech S, Lazzaretto A. Supercritical CO2 and ait Brayton-Joule versus ORC systems for heat revovery from glass furnaces:Performance and economic evaluation. Energy 2019;168:295–309.[6] Astolfi M, Alfani D, Lasala S, Macchi M. Comparison between ORC and CO2 power systems for the exploitation of low-mediumtemperature heat sources. Energy 2018;161:1250–61.[7] Giovannelli A, Archilei EM, Salvini C, Bashir MA, Messina G. Design of the power group for a 15 MW Supercritical CarbonDioxide Plant. In: 4th International Conference on Smart and Sustainable Technologies (SpliTech), Split, Croatia. 2019, p. 1–7.http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/SpliTech.2019.8783106.[8] Giovannelli A, Archilei EM, Lorenzo GDi, Salvini C, Bashir MA, Messina G. Design of power-blocks for medium-scale supercriticalcarbon dioxide plants. Energy Res 2020. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/er.5539.[9] Liu M, Zhang X, Ma Y, Yan J. Thermo-economic analyses on a new conceptual system of waste heat recovery integrated with anS-CO2 cycle for coal-fired power plants. Energy Convers Manage 2018;161:243–53.[10] Brun K, Friedman P, Dennis R. Fundamentals and Applications of Supercritical Carbon Dioxide (SCO2) Based Power Cycles. Elsevier;2017.[11] Marchionni M, Bianchi G, Tassou SA. Techno-economic assessment of Joule-Brayton cycle architectures for heat to power conversionfrom high-grade heat sources using CO2 in the supercritical state. Energy 2018;148(2018):1140–52.[12] Wright SA, Davidson CS, Scammel WO. Thermo-Economic Analysis of Four sCO2 Waste Heat Recovery Power Systems. In: 5thASME International Symposium - Supercritical CO2 Power Cycles. 2016.[13] Wang X, Yang Y, Zheng Y, Dai Y. Exergy and exergoeconomic analyses of a supercritical CO2 cycle for a cogeneration application.Energy 2017;119:971–82.[14] Sánchez Villafana ED, Vargas Machuca Bueno JP. Thermoeconomic and environmental analysis and optimization of the supercriticalCO2 cycle integration in a simple cycle power plant. Energy 2019;152:1–12.[15] Di Lorenzo G, Pilidis P, Witton J, Probert D. A framework for the evaluation of investments in clean power-technologies. ComputAided Process Eng 2012;30:492–6.[16] Maccapani M, Khan RSR, Burgmann PJ, Di Lorenzo G, Ogaji SOT, Pilidis P, Bennett I. A TERA based comparison of heavy dutyengines and their artificial design variants for liquified natural gas service. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2014;136:022001.[17] Salvini C, Giovannelli A, Varano M. Economic analysis of small size gas turbine based chp plants in the present Italian context. IntJ Heat Technol 2016;34:443–50.304