The economic recovery from COVID-19 should focus on people and their skills, not just technology

The economic recovery from COVID-19 should focus on people and their skills, not just technologyLSE Research Online URL for this paper: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/104904/Version: Published VersionOnline resource:Rolfe, Heather (2020) The economic recovery from COVID-19 should focus on people and their skills, not just technology. British Politics and Policy at LSE (21 May 2020). Blog Entry. lseresearchonline@lse.ac.ukhttps://eprints.lse.ac.uk/ ReuseItems deposited in LSE Research Online are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved unless indicated otherwise. They may be downloaded and/or printed for private study, or other acts as permitted by national copyright laws. The publisher or other rights holders may allow further reproduction and re-use of the full text version. This is indicated by the licence information on the LSE Research Online record for the item.The	economic	recovery	from	COVID-19	should	focuson	people	and	their	skills,	not	just	technologyHeather	Rolfe	argues	that,	while	investment	in	technology	is	undoubtedly	needed	as	part	of	theUK’s	recovery	strategy,	the	pandemic	has	highlighted	our	reliance	on	people	and	their	skills.	Thegovernment	should	therefore	also	be	focusing	on	how	to	get	people	back	into	better	and	moresustainable	work.The	coming	months	and	years	are	going	to	be	among	the	most	challenging	in	our	lifetime	for	oureconomy,	our	society,	and	many	of	us	individually.	Problems	of	unemployment,	low	productivity,	decliningcompetitiveness	and	low	innovation	will	be	hard	to	resolve;	harm	will	be	inflicted	on	people’s	working	and	personallives.	The	post-coronavirus	labour	market	is	going	to	be	very	different	to	the	one	we	left	behind	in	March.In	earlier	times	where	a	route	to	economic	recovery	has	needed	to	be	mapped,	politicians	have	called	fortechnology-led	solutions	to	accelerate	innovation,	production,	markets	and	consumption.	Take,	for	example	DavidCameron’s	2010	‘Blueprint	for	technology’.	Investment	in	technology	is	of	course	essential,	not	least	since	thecurrent	crisis	highlights	the	importance	of	science	and	technology	in	combating	future	pandemics.But	what	the	crisis	has	shown	most	clearly	is	how	much	we	rely	on	human	skills.	Previously	‘unskilled’	andundervalued	workers	in	care	homes,	food	factories	or	refuse	collection	have	been	elevated	to	‘key	worker’	status;we	applaud	the	dedication	and	skills	of	NHS	workers	every	Thursday	evening.	The	government	has	been	forced	toextend	the	visas	of	migrant	health	workers,	but	is	pressing	ahead	with	more	restrictive	immigration	policy.We’ve	all	become	more	dependent	on	the	skills	of	others:	in	our	work	on	colleagues	to	keep	us	focused,	motivatedand	productive;	in	our	communities	to	stop	the	spread	of	the	virus	and	to	look	out	for	the	vulnerable;	and	on	ourfamily	and	friends	for	so	much	more	than	we	would	have	expected.	We’ve	learned	just	how	much	we	depend	on,and	learn	from,	others	to	get	things	done.	We’ve	learned	that	other	people	bring	out	the	best	in	us.As	we	come	out	of	the	crisis,	we	need	a	recovery	strategy	focused	on	getting	people	back	to	work,	into	jobs	thatare	skilled	and	sustainable,	in	sectors	we	want	to	grow.	This	needs	to	include	changes	to	the	benefits	system,	tolocal	economic	planning.	It	also	needs	changes	to	our	immigration	policy	which	looks	set	to	hinder	recovery.	Itneeds	coordinated	policies	and	action	at	national	and	local	levels.	And	most	of	all,	it	needs	to	focus	on	people	andskills.Our	benefits	system	needs	an	overhaulUnemployment	rose	by	856,500	in	the	first	month	of	the	coronavirus	lockdown	and	7.5	million	workers	are	currentlyfurloughed.	There’s	no	doubt	that	once	the	Job	Retention	Scheme	ends,	many	furloughed	workers	will	lose	theirjobs	as	businesses	fail	to	recover.	Unemployment	is	likely	to	reach	levels	not	seen	in	the	UK	for	decades	and,	asthe	Resolution	Foundation	points	out,	young	people	are	likely	to	be	disproportionately	impacted.As	Jonathan	Portes	and	Tony	Wilson	have	proposed,	a	recovery	strategy,	involving	Jobcentre	Plus,	should	helpworkers	to	move	from	declining	into	expanding	and	viable	sectors.	They	also	propose	careful	tailoring	of	the	JobRetention	Scheme	and	high-quality	support	from	jobcentre	advisers	to	ease	this	transition.	For	this	to	work,	the	low-grade	box-ticking	‘employment	skills’	courses	where	participants	repeatedly	write	CVs,	need	replacing	by	realtraining	courses,	leading	to	technical	skills	and	designed	and	delivered	in	partnership	with	local	colleges	andemployers.Provision	might	include	employment	support	with	the	guarantee	of	a	job	or	training,	as	in	the	Future	Jobs	Fundwound	up	in	2012.	A	revised	scheme	could	create	jobs	and	training	places	in	sectors	important	to	recovery	andprogress,	and	tailored	to	local	needs.	As	a	first	and	immediate	step,	the	Flexible	Support	Fund,	which	givesadvisers	discretion	to	give	jobseekers	financial	support	for	training,	could	be	rebooted:	the	current	maximumpayment	of	£150	needs	to	be	raised	to	train	people	with	skills	for	new	jobs,	in	new	sectors.British Politics and Policy at LSE: The economic recovery from COVID-19 should focus on people and their skills, not just technology Page 1 of 3		Date originally posted: 2020-05-21Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/covid19-skills-economy/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/But	revisions	aren’t	enough.	Jobcentre	Plus	and	the	support	provided	to	unemployed	people	need	an	overhaul.Worksearch	and	signing	on	requirements	have	been	suspended	during	the	pandemic.	While	some	will	prefer	amore	hands-off	approach,	this	leaves	many	without	much	needed	help	in	finding	work	at	a	very	challenging	time.When	lockdown	ends,	the	network	of	jobcentres,	reduced	substantially	in	recent	years,	will	be	hard	pressed	to	helpthe	hundreds	of	thousands	of	new	jobseekers.	Real	support	needs	to	be	put	in	place.	It	needs	to	be	based	on	anew	approach,	one	that	puts	trust	in	jobseekers,	rather	than	using	conditionality	and	sanctioning	to	police	and	topunish.Employment	support	services	need	to	be	made	accessible	to	all	The	emphasis	of	our	welfare	system	on	benefits	and	enforcement	needs	replacing	with	a	support	and	counsellingethos.	It	should	aim	to	help	people	into	good-quality	and	sustainable	work.	As	we	come	out	of	the	crisis,	many	willneed	to	acquire	new	skills;	others	will	have	reflected	on	their	working	lives	and	be	looking	for	a	change.	A	surveyconducted	in	March	found	more	than	one	in	four	workers	believe	their	job	lacks	meaning	and	that	most	people	wanta	job	that	feels	purposeful.	Job	loss	and	distance	from	work	will	have	exacerbated	these	feelings.To	help	people	move	into	jobs	which	use	their	skills,	abilities,	and	interests,	a	programme	along	the	lines	of	CareerLearning	Pilots	needs	to	be	rolled	out	quickly.	Help	should	be	offered	to	people	of	all	ages	and	include	tailoredguidance,	rather	than	leaflets	and	web	pages.	Particular	efforts	must	be	made	to	reach	migrants	who	are	morelikely	than	others	to	be	in	jobs	which	under-utilise	their	skills.	This	new	provision	should	be	located	in	accessiblevenues	such	as	libraries	and	shopping	centres,	once	open.	Careers	guidance	needs	to	shake	off	its	associationswith	school.	It	needs	to	repurpose	itself	as	a	service	we	should	all	use	at	points	in	our	lives.We	need	local	solutionsThe	impact	of	the	virus	and	lockdown	has	been	very	different	across	industries	and	parts	of	the	UK.	Hotels,restaurants,	entertainment,	tourism,	retail	and	transport	are	among	the	long	list	of	sectors	hit	hard	by	lost	trade.Furloughing	has	been	much	higher	in	the	North	East	of	England	and	lower	in	London,	Scotland,	and	North	WestEngland.	At	the	same	time,	workers	in	London	and	the	South	East	have	been	more	likely	to	have	lost	their	jobs.These	variations	highlight	the	need	for	recovery	strategies	which	take	account	of	local	needs.In	2018,	Skills	Advisory	Panels	were	set	up	across	the	UK,	consisting	of	Local	Enterprise	Partnerships,	chambersof	commerce,	employer	bodies,	councils	and	devolved	governments.	These	should	play	a	leading	role	in	identifyingsectors	for	investment	and	support.	The	Learning	and	Work	Institute	suggests	job	creation	might	be	targeted	atsectors	hit	hard	by	the	pandemic	or	where	growth	is	desirable,	for	example	charities,	local	authorities,	and	low-carbon	industries.	National	and	local	bodies	need	to	work	together	to	identify	priority	sectors	for	renewal	andgrowth.And	employers	are,	of	course,	key	to	the	success	of	any	measure	aimed	at	getting	people	back	to	work	and	intojobs	where	they	will	be	productive,	effective,	and	fulfilled.	In	the	short-term,	they	can	use	the	furlough	scheme	fortraining	and	development.	It’s	not	enough	to	expect	employees	to	go	online;	training	needs	to	be	structured,assessed	and	new	skills	put	into	practice	or	ready	to	do	so	once	the	lockdown	is	lifted.The	coronavirus	crisis	has	put	the	spotlight	on	skillsTechnology	has	often	been	posed	as	the	solution	in	economically	and	socially	challenging	times.	Yet	COVID-19has	highlighted	the	importance	of	skills.	Over	decades,	policies	and	interventions	have	been	half-hearted,	under-funded,	and	ineffective.	But	now,	with	millions	facing	unemployment,	we	need	to	find	ways	of	getting	people	backinto	work	–	into	better,	more	fulfilling,	and	sustainable	work.	Technology	must,	of	course,	be	part	of	recovery	but	itisn’t	the	solution.	It	is	people,	their	skills	and	abilities	who	will	rebuild	our	damaged	economy.________________About	the	AuthorHeather	Rolfe	(@Heather_Rolfe)is	Director	of	Research	at	Demos.	She	previously	leadEmployment	and	Social	Policy	Research	at	NIESR.	Her	particular	areas	of	interest	includemigration,	inclusion	and	integration.British Politics and Policy at LSE: The economic recovery from COVID-19 should focus on people and their skills, not just technology Page 2 of 3		Date originally posted: 2020-05-21Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/covid19-skills-economy/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/	All	articles	posted	on	this	blog	give	the	views	of	the	author(s),	and	not	the	position	of	LSE	BritishPolitics	and	Policy,	nor	of	the	London	School	of	Economics	and	Political	Science.	Featured	imagecredit:	Pixabay	(Public	Domain).	British Politics and Policy at LSE: The economic recovery from COVID-19 should focus on people and their skills, not just technology Page 3 of 3		Date originally posted: 2020-05-21Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/covid19-skills-economy/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/