Contribution of Small-Scale Agroforestry to Local Economic Development and Livelihood Resilience: Evidence from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province (KPK), Pakistan

Citation: Zada, M.; Zada, S.; Ali, M.;Zhang, Y.; Begum, A.; Han, H.;Ariza-Montes, A.; Araya-Castillo, L.Contribution of Small-ScaleAgroforestry to Local EconomicDevelopment and LivelihoodResilience: Evidence from KhyberPakhtunkhwa Province (KPK),Pakistan. Land 2022, 11, 71. https://doi.org/10.3390/land11010071Academic Editor: Hossein AzadiReceived: 29 October 2021Accepted: 23 December 2021Published: 4 January 2022Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional affil-iations.Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).landArticleContribution of Small-Scale Agroforestry to Local EconomicDevelopment and Livelihood Resilience: Evidence fromKhyber Pakhtunkhwa Province (KPK), PakistanMuhammad Zada 1,2 , Shagufta Zada 3,4, Mudassar Ali 2 , Yongjun Zhang 1,*, Abida Begum 3, Heesup Han 5 ,Antonio Ariza-Montes 6 and Luis Araya-Castillo 71 Business School, Henan University, Kaifeng 475000, China; mzada@henu.edu.cn2 Department of Management Sciences, Alhamd Islamic University, Islamabad 44000, Pakistan;mudassarsalamat@gmail.com3 Ideological and Political Education Department, School of Marxism, Northeast Forestry University,Harbin 150040, China; shaguftanefu@yahoo.com (S.Z.); abidakhg@gmail.com (A.B.)4 Department of Business Administration, ILMA University, Karachi 75190, Pakistan5 College of Hospitality and Tourism Management, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, Korea; heesup@sejong.ac.kr6 Social Matters Research Group, Universidad Loyola Andalucía, C/Escritor Castilla Aguayo, 4,14004 Córdoba, Spain; ariza@uloyola.es7 Facultad de Economía y Negocios, Universidad Andrés Bello, Santiago de Chile 7591538, Chile;luis.araya@unab.cl* Correspondence: 10090055@vip.henu.edu.cnAbstract: Agroforestry plays a vital role in enhancing environmental sustainability, improving localeconomies, and reducing poverty through livelihood resilience. Several researchers have studiedthe importance of agroforestry, but little attention has been paid to livelihood resilience and localeconomic development in developing countries. This study aims to find the role of small-scaleagroforestry in local economic development in the Shangla and Swat districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa(KPK) Province, Pakistan. In this study, a total of 350 quantitative household surveys, 12 qualitativehousehold case studies, and interviews of experts are used. The ordinary least squares (OLS),linear regression model, household income, wealth index, and five capitals of sustainable livelihoodapproach (SLA) were used to measure livelihood resilience. Results show several significant findingswhich may apply on a larger scale and in other cities of Pakistan or other countries. First, it directlyshows the association between agroforestry, resilience-building, and local economic development.Second, financial capital can be improved through agroforestry, which can improve other capital assets.Third, small-scale agroforestry brings non-financial benefits such as environmental sustainability,improved living standards, reduced soil erosion, and provided shade. Fourth, irrigation plays a vitalrole in building livelihood resilience and promoting agroforestry. Lastly, on-farm diversity can beimproved through agroforestry. This research discusses several practical implications along withrecommendations for future research.Keywords: small scale agroforestry; local economic development; livelihood resilience; climatechange; sustainable livelihoods approach; KPK Pakistan1. IntroductionClimate change and environmental degradation are rapidly becoming importantglobal issues, creating severe challenges for local people and international developmentorganizations. It is essential to establish a robust framework of local economic develop-ment and livelihood resilience to preserve economic, political, environmental, and socialsustainability. Pakistan is an agricultural-based country with 21% of GDP and 43.7% ofemployment made up of the agriculture sector, which have about 47.03% agriculture landpercentage of total land [1,2]. Agriculture contributes to 25.6% of national growth andLand 2022, 11, 71. https://doi.org/10.3390/land11010071 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/landLand 2022, 11, 71 2 of 2142.02% of the total labor force in Pakistan. A study of MOA Finance [3] revealed that ap-proximately 9% of total exports are supported by agriculture, showing a positive impact oneconomic growth. Meanwhile, the Pakistani agriculture sector encounters constraints fromdeveloped countries due to inadequate quality, poor supply chain management methods,and worldwide market rivalry [4].Moreover, agriculture in Pakistan also provides raw materials to agro-based industries,such as textiles, leather, ghee, and sugar. The underprivileged community of Pakistanaccounts for around 40% of the overall population that are directly or indirectly affectedby the agriculture expansion and rely on agriculture and agroforestry for their livelihood.This sector’s contribution to economic growth is in decline because of the rapid growthof the industrial sector in developing countries [5,6]. The limitations of the agriculturalsector, similar to advanced level agricultural technology with trained framers, which affectits productivity, may be the primary reason for its decline [7,8]. However, this industrycontinues to face several issues, necessitating immediate action to design and make strongagricultural systems that safeguard livelihoods while promoting sustainable economicdevelopment [9,10]. Agroforestry is defined by the World Agroforestry Centre (WAC) asa collective name for land-use systems and technologies, where woody perennials (trees,shrubs, palms, bamboos, etc.) are deliberately used on the same land management unitas agricultural crops and livestock, either in some form of spatial arrangement or tempo-ral sequence. There are both ecological and economic interactions between the differentcomponents [10–13]. Agroforestry has an essential role in providing food and nutritionalsecurity [14–17], controlling land degradation [18,19], and supporting environmental bene-fits across a range of landscapes and economies [20–22]. Small-scale agroforestry seemsto potentially promote livelihood resilience, local economic development for low-incomefamilies, and biodiversity conservation on a small scale [21,23,24].Many research studies have shown positive associations between agroforestry, ecosystemservices, and the development of local economies and livelihoods around the globe [25,26].The productivity of the agricultural/forest sector can be improved through small-scaleagroforestry in level. Such activities can enhance land productivity by combining differenttrees with crops. Pastures could conserve resources, including soil volume, solar radiationforest reduction, and positively contribute to environmental sustainability [24,27–29]. Dif-ferent ecosystem and cultural services such as soil erosion control, air quality, pest control,fire retardation, water quality, nutrient retention, recreation control, aesthetics, culturalvalues, and livelihoods can be maintained and managed by agroforestry [30–32]. The KyotoProtocol also recognizes agroforestry as an instrument for carbon sequestration for themitigation of climate change [33].Small-scale agroforestry is one of the central parts of agriculture. A forest can developlivelihoods for poor farmers, helping them adapt to changes according to the situationand improve economic and environmental sustainability [12,24,34,35]. Thorlakson andNeufeldt [36] illustrate that little attention is given to the function of small-scale agroforestryin creating livelihood resilience. Furthermore, the few studies on the role of agroforestrytrees creating ecosystem resilience have not thoroughly investigated the particularly effec-tive system such as human society and the agro-environment [37]. Researchers highlightedthat both the development and academic sectors need additional research on resilience andsmall-scale agroforestry [38–40]. Despite the various benefits of agroforestry, there is stilllittle knowledge on the benefits and disadvantages of agroforestry’s contribution to thelivelihood resilience of poor communities.Agroforestry can play an essential role in improving livelihood by producing foodproducts (e.g., fruit, nuts, edible leaves, sap, and honey), fodder, timber, fuelwood, fibers,livestock, and medicines) many rural poor farmers are practicing low-input agriculturalpractices [41]. Agroforestry can improve food and nutrition security by supporting staple-crop production along with edible tree products for home consumption, raising farmerincomes through the sale of tree products and surplus staples, producing fuelwood forcooking and heating, and supporting pollination services, which are essential for theLand 2022, 11, 71 3 of 21production of food plants [42]. Some trees are considered to be the tree of life, as all partsare highly nutritive and consumed, which are helping poor people. The leaves, fruit, andother parts of many species of trees can serve as fodder for livestock, especially in dryseasons when other sources of forage are not available [43].Several researchers have studied the importance of agroforestry, but little attentionhas been paid to livelihood resilience and local economic development in developingcountries. No empirical study has examined the role of small-scale agroforestry in the localeconomic development in KPK, Pakistan. The government of KPK, Pakistan accomplishedthe mega afforestation project known as the billion-tree afforestation program (BTAP). Thespecific objectives of this project are to significantly raise forest areas, resolve environmentaldegradation, provide jobs to dissenters and develop local economics [44]. The Pakistangovernment believes that the project has boosted the local economic growth and livelihoodby offering small business units in forest and agroforestry nurseries, agroforestry, andother green jobs opportunities to the local household [45–47]. Based on the success andworldwide recognition by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) onachieving the Bonn challenge, the Pakistan government has extended the BTAP initiative,known as the ten billion trees afforestation program (BTAP), across the whole countryuntil 2030. The agroforestry system supplements the social, economic, and environmentalbenefits by providing fruit, nuts, fodder, wood fuel, livestock, timber and other products,and environmental services such as soil fertility replenishment and erosion control carbonsequestration. Trees normally remain in a landscape for many years, with rotation lengthsdepending on species and desired end-products. This system enhances economic growth,supporting sustainable development goals and helping to reduce poverty. However, wehave not come across any study that considers the impact of small-scale agroforestry onenhancing livelihood resilience in Pakistan. Based on these arguments, here, we striveto answer the call for more empirical evidence by drawing on fieldwork in Swat andShangla KPK to address the research question: Has the application of agroforestry systemsover time contributed to resilience in the Shangla and Swat districts? In examining thisresearch question, our primary objectives are to understand: (1) the relationships betweenpracticing agroforestry and non-practicing (2) specific agroforestry benefits that contributeto livelihood resilience, and (3) how agroforestry directly and indirectly builds livelihoodresilience with the impact of small–scale agroforestry on local economic growth, povertyalleviation and environmental sustainability in selected districts of KPK, Pakistan.2. Literature Review2.1. Theoretical Framework of Local Economic Development and Livelihood ResilienceLocal economic development through small-scale agroforestry and livelihood re-silience thinking is the focus of this study. BTAP highlights how agroforestry can increaseenvironmental sustainability and local economic development activities by ecosystem ser-vices such as flood control, soil erosion, wild population, and watershed and creating smallbusiness units such as nurseries and generating employment with forest cover increase [45].According to Zada, Shah [44], local households can improve their income through nurseries,fuel woods, construction material supply, fodder, non-timber products, honey, beeswax,traditional medicines, mushrooms, and fruits and other edible fruits, ecotourism, and othersmall business [48]. These local economic activities double as local manufacturers purchaseraw material from other local producers; basically, their employees first spend their incomelocally. They sell products in a large market to big origination and contribute to countryexports [49]. In contrast, early regional development theories and growth are focused onthat once employment opportunities are created, in-migration occurs [50].Holling [51] coined the term “resilience thinking”, which relates to social–ecologicalsystems. This critical concept discusses the competence of a system to bounce back andrecover after troubles and shocks [51]. This area of study stems from ecology, but it hasbeen utilized in various disciplines such as climate change adaptation, engineering, disasterrisk reduction, and forest management for the past four decades [52–54]. The meaning of aLand 2022, 11, 71 4 of 21resilient social–ecological system in this study is a productive agricultural and forest areathat can keep delivering ecosystem services for livelihood support despite the fact it canexperience shocks and disturbances [55,56]. A social–ecological system can have specificresilience or general resilience. By specific resilience, we mean resilience to a particularshock, and general resilience refers to handling an uncertain future. The object of this studyis to focus on the general resilience of a community.Resilience has gained sufficient consideration among researchers in the last couple ofdecades in the fields of climate change adaption, forest management, local development,and international development policies [57–59]. Brown [60] believes that the naturalsystems are the main focus of resilience thinking, and its ignorance of the social side ofsocial–ecological systems is often criticized. According to Tanner, Lewis [61], in the lightof resilience, human livelihoods need much more attention because it helps to developand adapt the strategies, which is the need of the most vulnerable segment of populationrural poor propel. Due to this, the resilience theory now includes a livelihood developmentperspective. To fix issues of maintaining livelihoods and environmental conservation,Tanner, Lewis [61] promote a livelihoods resilience perspective because it focuses onhuman empowerment and agency. To deal with an uncertain future, people are likely tobuild livelihood resilience and improve their economic level. Livelihood resilience is “theability of general population around the world to sustain and improve their livelihood andwelfare despite economic, environmental, political and social disturbances.” According toTanner, Lewis [61], human beings can play a central role in handling unpleasant situationsby linking with livelihood resilience.Furthermore, resilience for whom and resilience of what are two essential questionsthat the help of studying livelihood resilience can answer. Brown (2014) suggests thatby answering the “resilience for whom” question, the “resilience of what” question canbe answered. Coping strategies are essential in livelihood resilience because they helphouseholds during times of stress. These impulsive coping strategies are preparation andplanning to deal with shocks. Marschke and Berkes [62] explain that a household requiressome livelihood resilience building to deal with a special surprise. A livelihood system isrobust if it displays low sensitivity but high resilience [63]. A vulnerable livelihood system,however, has the opposite characteristics. The livelihood resilience concept is increasinglyused in global economic, climate change, and social systems transitions [64]. Bahadur andLovell [65] write that livelihood resilience is now implicitly and explicitly acknowledgedby the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals for 2030.2.2. Small-Scale Agroforestry Local Economic Development and Livelihood ResilienceResearchers worldwide agree that agroforestry is one important source that can assistlocal economic development, build livelihood resilience for an uncertain future, and main-tain environmental sustainability [56,66–70]. Luedeling, Smethurst [71], and Sinclair [72]explain that in agroforestry, the livestock, trees, and crops can be combined with temporalsequences and spatial arrangements. This concept can bring a variety of benefits for thegrowers [20,73,74]. Agroforestry provides several benefits to the smallholders and nature:food, cash income, energy, construction materials, medicine, livestock fodder, soil & waterconservation, and windbreaks [75–77]. It not only increases food security but also enhancessoil fertility [78]. Approximately 43% of the total farmlands in the world have at least 10%of tree cover, where about 1.8 million populations depend on agroforestry products andserveries for their livelihoods [79,80].Agroforestry is a prevalent source of livelihood, while only a few studies have dis-cussed the link between livelihood resilience and agroforestry empirically and comprehen-sively. The majority of researchers only focused on the indirect benefits of agroforestry.From an ecological point of view, agroforestry trees provide shade to crops, which influ-ences precipitation and temperature variation [34,66,67,70]. These trees also overcomedestruction due to storms [81]. As trees have deep roots, they can survive during droughts,but the crops alongside can perish [70]. Climate variability is normal, and sometimes theLand 2022, 11, 71 5 of 21blow of a natural disaster is risky for farmers to save their crops. Through agroforestryand growing trees, they can overcome this risk and protect their crops, too. Garrity, Akin-nifesi [82] highlight that due to small-scale agroforestry, farmers can obtain crop yieldsdespite droughts, but the farmers without agroforestry suffered crop failure.Furthermore, agroforestry can provide households with construction materials, fruits,and vegetables for direct household consumption or sales for earnings, increasing theireconomics and livelihood resilience. The literature review concludes that agroforestryplays the primary role in the local economic development of environmental sustainabilityand improves social well-being [83]. This is also the best option for the farmer to improvetheir livelihood resilience through agroforestry. With the understanding of significantevidence, no proper research has been conducted on the role of small-scale agroforestry inlocal economic development and building livelihood resilience in KPK, Pakistan or anyother country.3. Materials and Methods3.1. Study Site DescriptionThis study examined various prospects of small-scale agroforestry that contributeto local economic development, livelihood, poverty reduction, and the crucial roles thatagroforestry plays in the economic development of the KPK province of Pakistan, withspecific reference to the Shangla and Swat districts (See Figure 1). Geographically, thesedistricts cover 6905 square km, and the overall estimated cumulative population of thetwo sample districts is about 3.07 million KPK province was purposefully selected becauseit is the forest and agricultural rich province of Pakistan and needs research in this field.The forestry and mining industries dominate the region; however, agriculture has been anessential part of the whole province of KPK. The people of Shangla and Swat also growdifferent crops and trees on their land or leased land. This area is known for producinghigh-quality fruits and agro trees such as Persimmon, Oriental Plane, Black Persimmon,Peach, Walnut, Poplar, Pear, Loquat, Acacia, Plum, Apple, Apricot, Fig, Cedar, Melia, Olea,and Prunus. These Cities have been victims of various economic and political crises inthe past., some military operations devastated livelihoods associated with agriculture andforestry. Still, people have now started it again on a large scale. The agroforestry concept isnot new here; the community has been involved in it for a long time, and many poor peoplehave benefited from this KPK. The government has recently completed a mega-projectnamed BTAP to support this sector and the sustainable development of forests [84,85].Land 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 22  these factors have ade the area a perfect place to investigate the role of small-scale agro-forestry in building livelihood resilience.   Figure 1. Study area map. 3.2. Measuring Local Economic Development and Resilience with Sustainable Livelihoods Approach It is not easy to measure local economic development and resilience, but several re-searchers have suggested different methods for measuring resilience [53,55,88–90]. It is because measuring resilience directly is hard yet possible, which is why experts have sug-gested using quantifiable indicators of resilience [58]. The SLA has been engaged in this research to organize and develop indicators of livelihood resilience and economic devel-opment. Overall, households’ “economic development and livelihood resilience will then be measured using indicators”. According to Krantz (2001), the concept of sustainable livelihoods has its origins in the work of the Brutland Commission, which published a report in 1987 advocating for nations to focus on sustainable development. After the Brut-land Commission successfully proposed sustainable development as a crucial global agenda item, many researchers began to pay closer attention to the subject. The concept of sustainable livelihoods arose and grew insignificance in this context. Robert Chambers is recognized as one of the first attempts to define sustainable lifestyles, which he used in a discussion paper he co-authored with Gordon Conway in 1992. According to Chambers and Conway (1992: 7), “a livelihood comprises the capabilities, assets (stores, resources, claims, and access) and activities required for a means of living; a livelihood is sustainable which can cope with and recover from stress and shocks, maintain or enhance its capabil-ities and assets, and provide sustainable livelihood opportunities for the next generation; and which contributes net benefits to other livelihoods at the local and global levels and in the short and long-term.” Wider adoption and practice of the concept of sustainable livelihoods entailed began to be adopted by development agencies mainly from the United Kingdom, such as the Department of International Development (DFID), Cooper-ative for Assistance, and Relief Everywhere (CARE), and Oxford Committee for Famine Relief OXFAM. DFID later modified the definition given by [91]; they defined a sustaina-ble livelihood as encompassing. Development agencies, primarily from the United King-dom, such as the Department of International Development (DFID), Cooperative for As-sistance and Relief Everywhere (CARE), and Oxford Committee for Famine Relief OXFAM, began to adopt practice the concept of sustainable livelihoods on a larger scale. The notion of sustainable living was later updated by DFID, who defined it as comprising Figure 1. Study area map.Land 2022, 11, 71 6 of 21Furthermore, the population of Shangla is almost poor, depends on forestry andagriculture for livelihoods, and Shangla is one of the less developed districts of KPK,while Swat has little development compared to Shangla [44,86]. Moreover, Shangla andSwat are likely to be affected by economic and climate change. It is also important tomention that these two districts are famous for agroforestry production in Pakistan. Dueto this, the responses would be diverse concerning the research question. The climatezone of Shangla and Swat is agroforestry friendly [87]. Due to a large population andscarcity of employment opportunities, the people of these districts encounter difficultymeeting the requirement of daily life. The primary source of income and livelihood issmall agriculture farming, income from livestock, remittances, mining, and other smallbusinesses. Thus, these factors have made the area a perfect place to investigate the role ofsmall-scale agroforestry in building livelihood resilience.3.2. Measuring Local Economic Development and Resilience with SustainableLivelihoods ApproachIt is not easy to measure local economic development and resilience, but severalresearchers have suggested different methods for measuring resilience [53,55,88–90]. Itis because measuring resilience directly is hard yet possible, which is why experts havesuggested using quantifiable indicators of resilience [58]. The SLA has been engaged inthis research to organize and develop indicators of livelihood resilience and economicdevelopment. Overall, households’ “economic development and livelihood resilience willthen be measured using indicators”. According to Krantz (2001), the concept of sustainablelivelihoods has its origins in the work of the Brutland Commission, which published areport in 1987 advocating for nations to focus on sustainable development. After theBrutland Commission successfully proposed sustainable development as a crucial globalagenda item, many researchers began to pay closer attention to the subject. The concept ofsustainable livelihoods arose and grew insignificance in this context. Robert Chambers isrecognized as one of the first attempts to define sustainable lifestyles, which he used in adiscussion paper he co-authored with Gordon Conway in 1992. According to Chambers andConway (1992: 7), “a livelihood comprises the capabilities, assets (stores, resources, claims,and access) and activities required for a means of living; a livelihood is sustainable whichcan cope with and recover from stress and shocks, maintain or enhance its capabilities andassets, and provide sustainable livelihood opportunities for the next generation; and whichcontributes net benefits to other livelihoods at the local and global levels and in the short andlong-term.” Wider adoption and practice of the concept of sustainable livelihoods entailedbegan to be adopted by development agencies mainly from the United Kingdom, such asthe Department of International Development (DFID), Cooperative for Assistance, andRelief Everywhere (CARE), and Oxford Committee for Famine Relief OXFAM. DFID latermodified the definition given by [91]; they defined a sustainable livelihood as encompassing.Development agencies, primarily from the United Kingdom, such as the Department ofInternational Development (DFID), Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere(CARE), and Oxford Committee for Famine Relief OXFAM, began to adopt practice theconcept of sustainable livelihoods on a larger scale. The notion of sustainable living waslater updated by DFID, who defined it as comprising (Chambers and Conway, 1992) “thecapabilities, assets, (including both material and social resources) and activities requiredfor a means of living and the sustainability of a livelihood is when it can cope with andrecover from stresses and shocks and maintain or enhance capabilities and assets now andin the future while not undermining the natural resource” [92].According to the SLA that household livelihoods should be considered in the form ofhousehold access to the five capital assets (financial, human, physical, social and naturalcapital), in this method, households combine capital assets to generate their livelihood,and how a household can increase their assets with the collaboration of the with otherinstitution and actors [91,93–96]. This is the actual portrayal of sustainable livelihood. Fivetypes of capital assets included human capital, financial capital, physical capital, socialLand 2022, 11, 71 7 of 21capital, natural capital, all basic elements essential for a sustainable livelihood and localeconomic development [97–100].Financial capital defines economic resources which are obligatory by an individualto meet livelihood goals. These may include savings, credit, inflows of remittances/statetransfers, and the size of livestock farm pertain [98,99,101]. Physical capital refers to accessto basic infrastructures and services, which is essential for supporting and developingsustainable livelihood. These may include roads and irrigations [97]. Human capital refersto the knowledge, education, training, and the capability to work in excellent health thatempowers individuals to follow livelihood strategies [100]. Social capital represents thefeatures of a social organization that serve to coordinate actions. These are social resourcesindividuals draw on in pursuit of livelihood objectives and include networks, exchange,associations, groups, reciprocity, and relationships of trust [102]. Natural capital consists ofthe natural reserves that are essential contributions for the poor households and from whichlivelihood is generally derived. It ranges from tangibles to intangible goods, such as s airquality, soil quality, biodiversity, and saline and lodging for a healthy environment [98,99].A household is expected to retain these five capitals in a balance [103]. Throughthe creation of livelihood, assets may improve the ability of households to give a timelyresponse to shocks. The SLA also provides various assets that households use to enhancetheir livelihoods [86] and to understand the fluctuating arrangements of events of livelihoodin a historical and changing background [104]. However, it has been evaluated for notadequately accounting for power associations [95] and not being expert driven.SLA is one of the appropriate approaches in agroforestry for organizing resilience andlocal economic development indicators. This research used indicators that were adaptedfrom the literature about livelihood resilience. The research study of Quandt [105] wasconsulted; it considered local perspectives of the impacts of floods and droughts [106,107].According to the study of Jones and Tanner [58], livelihood resilience promotes somemeasures of individual resilience, although measuring it is a top-down, objective process.As Gupta, Dagar [108] studied that agroforestry is earning improving living standards andenvironmental sustainability. Based on past studies, this question has been addressed by in-cluding subjective, local ideas of livelihood and economic development in the indicators ofthis research study. The indicators were transformed into quantitative questions that helpedmeasure livelihood resilience by asking a targeted population. After asking questions, theanswers were accumulated for the five livelihood capitals (composite asset indexes) andhousehold overall (overall composite asset indexes). Figure 2 describes this process, andmore details will be covered in the results section Multitude of assets and diversity (relatedto livelihood resilience) is the focus of methods used in this study [94,109,110]. Moreover,the local economic development and well-being of livelihoods can be increased, and therisks of shock can be reduced through diversification [110]. Five livelihood capital assetshelped this research study contrast and compare livelihood capitals between householdsand measure resilience in a non-monetized approach.A few studies have used the SLA to measure local economic development and re-silience; it has not been frequently used [96,98,99]. Community and household resiliencehave been measured by Thulstrup [96] with the help of SLA after government interventionsin Vietnam. The poverty maps were created by [99] to build resilience with the help of fivecapital assets. This research study is also based on previous works in this area.3.3. Questionnaire Design and Sampling Technique and Data CollectionSurveys employing a quantitative research methodology for data collecting in Shanglaand Swat using the Bureau of Statistics Pakistan’s prepared questionnaire by two-stepcluster sampling procedures. To avoid confusion of items or ambiguities in the responsegroups, the designed questionnaire was pre-tested in the last two weeks of January 2018 ona sample of 50 households from the selected districts in KPK, Pakistan. For proper datacollection in June 2019, ten social organizers with a minimum of four years’ experience inthe social sector from national NGOs were selected. Data were collected from both groupsLand 2022, 11, 71 8 of 21(people linked with agroforestry and people not linked with agroforestry). For this purpose,fifteen villages were randomly selected for this research in Shangla and Swat, and thenwe distributed 370 questionnaires among these social organizers, one questionnaire perhousehold. Out of these 370 questionnaires, 350 were considered valid to be used in theanalysis. The response rate was 94.59%. Out of these 350, 260 individuals were currentlyfilled from Swat and 90 from Shangla.Land 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 22  A few studies have used the SLA to measure local economic development and resil-ience; it has not been frequently used [96,98,99]. Community and household resilience have been measured by Thulstrup [96] with the help of SLA after government interven-tions in Vietnam. The poverty maps were created by [99] to build resilience with the help of five capital assets. This research study is also based on previous works in this area.   Figure 2. SLA-modified framework. 3.3. Questionnaire Design and Sampling Technique and Data Collection Surveys employing a quantitative research methodology for data collecting in Shangla and Swat using the Bureau of Statistics Pakistan’s prepared questionnaire by two-step cluster sampling procedures. To avoid confusion of items or ambiguities in the re-sponse groups, the designed questionnaire was pre-tested in the last two weeks of January 2018 on a sample of 50 households from the selected districts in KPK, Pakistan. For proper data collection in June 2019, ten social organizers with a minimum of four years’ experi-ence in the social sector from national NGOs were selected. Data were collected from both groups (people linked with agroforestry and people not linked with agroforestry). For this purpose, fifteen villages were randomly selected for this research in Shangla and Swat, and then we distributed 370 questionnaires among these social organizers, one question-naire per household. Out of these 370 questionnaires, 350 were considered valid to be used in the analysis. The response rate was 94.59%. Out of these 350, 260 individuals were cur-rently filled from Swat and 90 from Shangla. Furthermore, 176 households are directly linked with agroforestry, while 174 house-holds were not directly linked and beneficiaries of small-scale agroforestry. Similarly, 12 qualitative case studies of households and interviews of experts were conducted, seven from Swat and five from Shangla. This information is instrumental in discovering the fun-damental role of small-scale agroforestry in building livelihood residences in Shangla and Swat.  3.4. Data Analysis and Empirical Strategy After collection, the data were entered into the computer for analysis to obtain proper results. Different empirical strategies were applied. The strategy consisted of the three-part first descriptive statistics. The second measurement of household income and wealth Figure 2. SLA-modified framework.Furthermore, 176 households are directly linked with agroforestry, while 174 house-holds were not directly linked and beneficiaries of small-scale agroforestry. Similarly,12 qualitative case studies of households and interviews of experts were conducted, sevenfrom Swat and five from Shangla. This information is instrumental in discovering thefundamental role of small-scale agroforestry in building livelihood residences in Shanglaand Swat.3.4. Data Analysis and Empirical StrategyAfter coll ction, th data were entered in o the comput r for analysis to obtain properresults. Different empirical strat gies we applied. The strategy co sisted of the three-partfirst descriptive statistics. The second m asurement of hous h ld income and wealth indexand effects of small-scale agroforestry on the income and wealth of households is the lastestimate of the significant effect of variables, which uses the linear regression model.3.4.1. Agroforestry, Househol I come, and Wealth: The Empirical ModelThis study estimates two equations that assess the impacts of small-scale agroforestryon the income and wealth of local households.Incomei = α0 + α1samll scale Agro f orestry Enterprisei + γXh + εi, (1)Wealth Indexi = β0 + β1samll scale Agro f orestry Enterprisei + γZh + εi, (2)LEDi = θ0 + θ1samll scale Agro f orestry Enterprisei + γZh + εi, (3)where Incomei, Wealth Indexi measure the level of income and wealth for the ith individual,and samll sacle Agro f orestry Enterprisei is a dummy variable that measures whether theLand 2022, 11, 71 9 of 21given respondent is associated with small scale agroforestry. Xh and Zh are household-levelcontrol variables. εi is a disturbance term.To empirically estimate Equations (1) and (2), the widely acknowledged ordinary leastsquares (OLS) methodology was used, where α1 and β1 stand for the impact of small-scaleagroforestry on household income and wealth. Besides income and wealth, the study usedlinear regression techniques to evaluate the results.LEDi respectively measures Local Economic Development for the ith individual, andEnterprisei is a dummy variable that measures whether the given respondent is associatedwith Small-scale agroforestry. Zh in each equation is the set of household-level controlvariables. εi denotes a disturbance term.To empirically estimate Equation (3), ordered logit methodology was used. Technically,OLS methodology cannot provide optimal results when the explanatory variable is orderedresponses [64]. There is a consensus among econometricians that the ordered logisticregression model provides efficient results in such situations.3.4.2. InterviewThe qualitative household case study interviews were coded using QSR Nvivo10software. Codes were developed from the academic literature, the discussion topics, andthemes that emerged during the research process. The different data sources (qualitative,quantitative, and ecological) were compared and contrasted with triangulating results inan iterative process.4. Results and Discussion4.1. Descriptive ResultsTable 1 shows the comparison between households practicing small-scale agroforestryand households not practicing small-scale agroforestry in Shangla and Swat. Householdsengaged in small-scale agroforestry were more likely to have basic comparisons such as abank account, labor force, crops planted, and irrigation. Agroforestry increases the incomeand assets of households through the profits earned by selling fruits and timbers, whichcan be used to pay educational fees and purchase food and medicine for their familiesby contributing to the local economic development. Thomas and Huber [32] showeda similar result, highlighting that the locally generated income would circulate locally.This way, they contribute to the region’s local economic development. The results showthat the wealth index (out of 11: tractor, computer, television, electric fan, car, air cooler,mobile phone, electric iron, motorcycle, air conditioner, and refrigerator) of both groups is11.2 and 8.9, respectively.4.2. Agroforestry and Its BenefitsAgroforestry plays a vital role in the sustainable development of Pakistan. Table 2shows the different types of agro trees, and small-scale agroforestry benefits the household’seconomic growth in Shangla and Swat. The main agro trees of the area are Poplar, Orientalplane, Persimmon, Black Persimmon, Plum, Apple, Peach, Acacia Keekar, Fig, Pear, Wal-nuts, Apricot, Melia, and Morus. These trees provide several benefits to the household. Themain benefits include income, food, firewood, and construction. The households use thesetrees for their consumption as well as for sale and profit. It is also worthy of mentioningthat local people did not doubt that AF systems are an environment-friendly activity andprovide many benefits to the environment. During the research, it was observed that manypeople use agroforestry for the beautification of the land, windbreaks, erosion prevention,rain attraction, and compost. It was also observed that the farmers target populations,also facing some major constraints in the proper development of small-scale agroforestrysuch as the size of farm, plants disease and pests’ control, lack of proper training, localrobbery of fruit, lack of water for irrigation, lack of proper know-how about the plantations,and inaccessibility to tree seeds and seedlings. Despite these constraints, the agroforestrysystem is improving and diversifying agricultural production with fewer inputs, less tech-Land 2022, 11, 71 10 of 21nicalities, and lower costs. Their management should be adapted according to changingcircumstances as well, such as ongoing climate changes. For instance, the size of the plots,location of the plot in terms of access, slope, and land-use change can affect the biodiversitycontribution of agroforestry. Below a certain level of plot size, it may be impossible tosustain livestock and another biodiversity as well. Despite the biodiversity contributionof the agroforestry system, the implication is far better than the conventional single layerof monocultures crops. It is more efficient to produce more goods on a given land areathan other land management systems, such as water, sunlight, nutrients, and always moreadaptive response to extreme climate events. The agroforestry system also provides a rangeof ecosystem services. It is best to reduce erosion, restore degraded lands, improve waterconservation, water quality, climate change adaptation, and help mitigation. If deployedinadequately, it can increase competition and adverse effects.Table 1. The difference in the household between households linked with small scale agroforestryand households not linked with agroforestry.HouseholdsLinked toAgroforestry(Treatment Group)HouseholdNot Linked toAgroforestry(Control Group)Difference (1–2)(1) (2) (3)Demographic InformationBank account 1.78 1.03 0.75Size of farmland 1.0 0.65 0.35Irrigation Access 1.19 1.03 0.16Ownership of Area 1.01 0.75 0.26Membership 2.23 1.89 0.34Labor force b/w 18–60 1.05 0.97 0.08Education 7.0 6.13 0.87Number of trees crops 1.09 0.058 0.51Asset PossessionsWealth Index (Before) 8.5Wealth Index (After) 11.2 8.9 2.3Number of responses 176 174 350Table 2. Types of trees and benefits from these trees.Major Plants Income Construction Food Fodder Firewood Medicine TimberPoplar 23 6 - - 2 - 0Oriental plane 6 - - - - - 4Persimmon 17 2 7 - 6 0 9Black persimmon 13 0 9 5 8 0 5Plum 6 5 6 - 5 2 3Apple 12 2 5 - 0 3 -Peach 16 - 8 0 5 1 -Acacia Keekar 10 7 - 5 6 0 5Fig 5 - 6 3 4 2 0Pear 8 - 7 - 5 1 0Walnuts 7 - 4 - 3 3 5Apricot 4 0 5 0 3 2 -Melia 7 5 - 3 4 - 2Morus 5 3 - 2 2 3 3Total 139 30 57 18 53 17 36Scientific name: Populus, Platanus orientalis Diospyros virginiana Diospyros texana, Prunus domestica, Malus,Prunus persica, Acacia, Ficus carica, Pyrus, Juglans, Prunus armeniaca, Melia azedarach and Morus alba.Land 2022, 11, 71 11 of 214.3. Livelihood Capital and the Effect of Small-Scale Agroforestry on This CapitalAgroforestry plays a significant role in local economic development and buildinglivelihood resilience, helping farmers provide financial capital besides financial benefit.Agroforestry also provides non-financial benefits such as social and environmental andimproving household livelihood through planning different agroforestry activities such asfruits, nuts, plants, trees and livestock. The results further revealed that households linkedwith agroforestry earn 6% more income and have 23% more assets. Figure 3 representsthe household case study, interviews, observations and relates to the S.L.A. capitals. FromFigure 3, it is clear that small scale agroforestry improves these capitals, and these capitalsare also interlinked with each other by agroforestry. Various benefits of agroforestrypositively impact different livelihood capital. In detail, the usage of fruits boosts health(human capital) and provides a source of income (financial capital).Land 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 22   Figure 3. Agroforestry benefits and sustainable livelihood capital. 4.4. Results of OLS Regression This section provides the empirical results of small-scale agroforestry impact on the differences in observed outcomes (i.e., income and wealth) between the households’ link with small scale agroforestry (treatment group) and households not linked with small scale agroforestry (control group). In order to do so, OLS estimated Equations (1) and (2), and the results are presented in Table 3. Column (1) of Table 3 illustrates the results for income differences. A better return on investment can be achieved by planting trees than that grains or maize because trees have a high value. Conversely, trees help avoid income shocks. It is evident that beneficiaries of small-scale agroforestry, on average, earn 6% more.  Similarly, column 2 of Table 3 indicates that beneficiaries of agroforestry own 2.3 more assets, 23%, compared to their counterparts. By the income earned from small-scale agroforestry, a household can manage their livelihoods coherent with the results of Agrawal and Perrin [111]. They revealed that a household could be more vulnerable to disturbances and shocks if it has fewer financial assets. Moreover, the effects of climate change can be higher for households with a low amount of financial assets[112].  Moreover, R2 of income and wealth index are 0.383 and 0.341, respectively, implying small-scale agroforestry. It contributes 38% to forecasting income, while 34% predicts wealth. Although many researchers have discussed the climate impact of small-scale ag-roforestry, the current study’s findings add the new role of small-scale agroforestry into the literature of agricultural enterprises. Various studies report the positive effects of small agricultural entrepreneurship. However, this study is different, as it measured the impact of small-scale agroforestry in the local economic development and building of live-lihood resilience. Moreover, these findings indicate the positive effects of agroforestry on the income and wealth of households:    Figure 3. Agroforestry benefits and sustainable livelihood capital.Many households sell their fruit and nuts and earn an extra profit through small-scaleagroforestry. Some farmers managed to improve their livelihood capital assets by utilizingthe income from agroforestry. For example, some people have paid children’s school feesby using the money they earned by selling fruits and timber, which increases human capital.As an outcome of agroforestry, the overall livelihood resilience can improve consistentresults with Jacobs, Nelson [103]. He also found positive effects between the five livelihoodassets, building livelihoods, economic development, and agroforestry. The households witha balanced and high livelihood capital will be more resilient in the long term. The results ofthis analysis suggest that farmers can quickly improve their household’s financial situationby using agroforestry and planting trees around their crops. A significant number of peoplewho participated in this research study admitted increasing their income by planting treesaround their crops.Moreover, the financial capital score increased for households with a more signif-icant number of trees. This is because an increased number of trees comes with an in-Land 2022, 11, 71 12 of 21creased amount of income. Furthermore, the farm size also matters because it can limitthe ability of a household to grow trees which means that the farm size is directly pro-portional to the financial capital. For this reason, farm size can be a limiting factor forsmall-scale agroforestry.4.4. Results of OLS RegressionThis section provides the empirical results of small-scale agroforestry impact on thedifferences in observed outcomes (i.e., income and wealth) between the households’ linkwith small scale agroforestry (treatment group) and households not linked with smallscale agroforestry (control group). In order to do so, OLS estimated Equations (1) and (2),and the results are presented in Table 3. Column (1) of Table 3 illustrates the results forincome differences. A better return on investment can be achieved by planting trees thanthat grains or maize because trees have a high value. Conversely, trees help avoid incomeshocks. It is evident that beneficiaries of small-scale agroforestry, on average, earn 6% more.Table 3. Small scale agroforestry and observed outcomes.(1) (2)Dependent Variable(s) Log (income) Wealth IndexAgroforestry (=1) 6.141 *** 2.329 ***(0.024) (0.024)Bank 0.003 *** −0.009 ***(0.002) (0.005)Size of farm land 0.280 * 0.253 **(0.044) (0.125)Irrigation access 0.00140 0.00103(0.00678) (0.0486)Ownership of area 0.00107 −0.0646 *(0.00520) (0.0382)No of Household b/w 18–60 0.058 *** 0.270 *(0.032) (0.085)Education 0.036 * 0.352 *(0.014) (0.036)Number of trees/crops 0.054 ** 0.066(0.026) (0.075)Constant 1.503 8.490(1.412) (1.037)Observations 350 350R2 0.383 0.341Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, with robust standard errors in parentheses.Similarly, column 2 of Table 3 indicates that beneficiaries of agroforestry own 2.3 moreassets, 23%, compared to their counterparts. By the income earned from small-scaleagroforestry, a household can manage their livelihoods coherent with the results of Agrawaland Perrin [111]. They revealed that a household could be more vulnerable to disturbancesand shocks if it has fewer financial assets. Moreover, the effects of climate change can behigher for households with a low amount of financial assets [112].Moreover, R2 of income and wealth index are 0.383 and 0.341, respectively, implyingsmall-scale agroforestry. It contributes 38% to forecasting income, while 34% predictswealth. Although many researchers have discussed the climate impact of small-scaleagroforestry, the current study’s findings add the new role of small-scale agroforestry intothe literature of agricultural enterprises. Various studies report the positive effects of smallagricultural entrepreneurship. However, this study is different, as it measured the impactof small-scale agroforestry in the local economic development and building of livelihoodresilience. Moreover, these findings indicate the positive effects of agroforestry on theincome and wealth of households:Land 2022, 11, 71 13 of 21We further analyzed three specific aspects of the LED measures. Table 4 indicatesthe perceived effects on income, employment, and savings due to a connection with SSAF.Since the dependent variable is ordinal, ordered logit regressions were used for the analysis.Columns (1–3) show that SSAF positively affects income, employment, and savings. Theseresults are also consistent with the existing literature on small entrepreneurship, such asthe findings of Ali [9], who found a positive association between forest income and theLED of households.Table 4. SSAF and LED.Dependent Variable(s)(1) (2) (3)Income Employment SavingEnterprise (=1) 2.286 *** 2.672 *** 2.242 ***(0.201) (0.206) (0.202)Age −0.0274 −0.104 ** 0.0360(0.0402) (0.0429) (0.0403)Gender 0.0272 −0.210 0.305(0.334) (0.329) (0.302)Education 0.0951 0.0108 0.0639(0.126) (0.133) (0.124)Family Size −0.00590 −0.0681 0.00818(0.0945) (0.0946) (0.0970)Knowledge (forestry) 0.0881 0.0983 −0.0186(0.0747) (0.0770) (0.0758)/cut1 −1.653 −5.278 *** 0.250(1.639) (1.723) (1.604)/cut2 −0.789 −4.168 ** 1.350(1.635) (1.707) (1.604)/cut3 0.869 −2.422 3.104 *(1.634) (1.698) (1.617)/cut4 2.631 −0.687 4.936 ***(1.630) (1.676) (1.620)Observations 350 350 350Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, with robust standard errors in parentheses.4.5. Results of the Linear Regressions ModelIn Table 5, the evaluated results of the regression analysis of the three models arereported. Table 5 represents the value of coefficients and their standard errors. The valueof coefficients shows the relationship between that particular independent variable and adependent variable. The results of model 1 show that our independent variables of the sizeof farmland, age, irrigational access, ownership of the area, and the number of trees havepositively influenced agroforestry. However, bank account, memberships, and educationhave a positive and weighty link with agroforestry. This means that an increase in bettereducation, memberships, and a bank account will increase the productivity of agroforestry.Irrigation access plays a significant part in growing trees and sustainable development.A similar result is shown by Zomer, Neufeldt [80], who highlighted the importance ofirrigation for agroforestry in northern India. Irrigation can help plant trees, which in turncan boost livelihood resilience.Results of model 2 show that our independent variables of bank account, irrigationaccess, number of trees, and age positively influenced tree density. The size of farmlandhas a positive association with tree density. This means that the increased size of farmlandwill increase the density of the trees. Crop diversity and tree species (a form of on-farmdiversity) have helped farmers develop livelihood resilience in Shangla and Swat. Moreover,household finances can be enhanced through tree diversity and contribute to local economicdevelopment. The presence of different types of trees comes with many other benefits aswell, for example, peaches, which are a favorite fruit in Swat [113]. Peaches can be usedLand 2022, 11, 71 14 of 21as a fruit, but they also has many other industrial applications. They are also known forshade, construction materials, and firewood, similar to results [36,114].Table 5. Dependent variable Agroforestry, trees, trees diversity.Agroforestry Trees Trees DiversityIndependent Variables Coeff. Stand.Error CoeffStand.Error CoeffStand.ErrorBank account 1.78 ** (0.6) 0.09 (0.13) 0.06 (0.05)Size of farmland 1.0 (0.04) 0.09 ** (0.05) 0.01 (0.01)Irrigational access 1.19 (0.37) 0.09 (0.20) 0.028 (0.06)Ownership of area 1.01 (0.21)Agricultural Membership 2.23 * (0.79)No of Household b/w 18–60 1.05 (0.06) 0.08 (0.02) 0.01 (0.01)Education 7.0 * (7.09)Number of trees/croups 1.09 ** (0.04) 0.241 (1.07) 0.058 (0.07)R-squared 0.182 0.08 0.08Note(s): ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level. *. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level.The results of model 3 show that our independent variables of bank account, irri-gational access, size of farmland, age, and the number of trees positively influence treediversity, which is coherent with the results of Ellis [110], who found that risk can bereduced. Well-being can be increased by diversifying livelihoods and improving the eco-nomic situation of the household. Similarly, McCabe, Leslie [68] also noted that poorfarmers of East Africa have been diversifying their livelihoods for decades. Doing so hashelped them fight increased population, climate change, and political uncertainties.In Table 6, the evaluated results of the regression analysis are reported. Table 5represents the value of coefficients and their standard errors. The value of coefficientsshows the relationship between that particular independent variable and a dependentvariable. The evaluated results show that financial capital has an encouraging positiveinfluence on small-scale agroforestry. The coefficient value of financial capital is 0.01.Human capital has a positive link with agroforestry. An increase in human capital willenhance small-scale agroforestry. The coefficient value of human capital is 0.32. Socialcapital has a positive link with agroforestry. The coefficient value of social capital is 0.45and is statistically insignificant. Physical capital has a positive link with agroforestry. Thecoefficient value of physical capital is 0.39 and is statistically insignificant. Natural capitalhas a positive influence on agroforestry. The coefficient value of natural capital is 0.48. Theseresults are consistent with Jacobs, Nelson [103], who studied that the balance of the fivecapital is essential for the household to respond to uncertain shocks. Similarly, Thorlaksonand Neufeldt [36] found that agroforestry improves the household’s financial position,enabling them to respond positively to future shocks. Furthermore, Tanner, Lewis [61]found that households linked with agroforestry sustain their livelihoods in a satiable waythrough selling fruits and timbers to generate income, which assists themselves and theirlivelihoods in political, economic, and ecological disturbances.Table 6. Dependent variable: Small-scale agroforestry.Small-Scale AgroforestryCoeff. Stand. Error p ValueFinancial Capital 0.01 0.018 0.000 *Human Capital 0.32 0.035 0.229Social Capital 0.45 0.074 0.124Physical Capital 0.39 0.042 0.322Natural Capital 0.48 0.039 0.000 *Note(s): * p < 0.1. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level. *. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level.Land 2022, 11, 71 15 of 21In Table 7, the evaluated results of regression analysis are reported. Table 6 representsthe value of coefficients and their standard errors. Estimated results represent a positiveassociation between an increase in tree density and the quality of life. The coefficient valueof improved quality is 0.08. An increase in tree density also has a positive impact on incomeor the earning of people. The coefficient value of improved quality is 0.18. Results areconsistent with Tanner, Lewis [61] found that the improving livelihoods resilience per-spective to solve the environmental issue and maintain livelihoods and enable householdresponse uncertain future through the income earned from the agroforestry and contributelocal economic development. Similarly, with the economic benefit of agroforestry, thereare also several environmental benefits such as preventing soil erosion [115] and being asignificant source for wind-breaking. Furthermore, agroforestry is also a source of shadeand beautification, which protects households from the summer heat, consistent with theresult of Adger [102].Table 7. Dependent variable: tree density.Coeff Stand. ErrorImproved Quality 0.087 (0.098)Improved income 0.184 (0.119) ***Note(s): *** p < 0.01, Correlation is significant at the 0.001.4.6. Limitation and RecommendationsUsing the SLA to discuss these results, it becomes clear that the socio-economic impactrelates to the livelihoods of rural farmers in many different ways; through different typesof assets, through structures and processes that shape the livelihoods of the farmers, thelivelihood strategies to achieve certain livelihood outcomes, and the livelihood outcomes.This broad impact of small-scale agroforestry on local economic development and liveli-hoods. It is believed that agroforestry plays a vital role in local economic developmentand building livelihood resilience. Along with the primary source of livelihoods and localeconomic development, agroforestry also plays an important in environmental sustainabil-ity. Furthermore, we argue that this can increase the sustainability of the measured localeconomic development impacts and environmental impacts in the future.However, as of yet, the results reported in this paper still have contributed less thantheir potential to improve the local economic development, livelihoods and environmentalsustainability. Therefore, we recommend that future researchers examine the factor affectingagroforestry in the long run and address the current challenges and issues faced by theformer of the study area. Future work could relate ecological and nutritional indicators atlarger spatial and temporal scales to incorporate the community, landscape, and governanceconditions that enable farmers to manage agroecosystems for resilience.The sustainable livelihoods approach is seen as central to all meaningful efforts thatcontribute to rural livelihood and alleviate poverty around the globe. Environmental sus-tainability concerns itself with looking at how livelihoods adopted externally impact otherlivelihoods. The notion of environmental sustainability is operationalized at different levels,the local and the global. We have placed considerable effort into assessing agroforestryfarmers’ livelihood resilience and the feasibility of expanding. However, some limitationscould also be noted for future work. First, interviews might be carried out with localfarmers who have been practicing forest to explicitly explain their social, technical, andfinancial difficulties and benefits in cultivation. SLA could be said to be a practical approachfor evidence-based intervention and has much logic resting behind it, especially in a worldundergoing rapid change and where resources to support development interventions areinevitably limited. Second, focus group discussion meetings in other selected case studyareas under the KPK, Pakistan’s scheme was considered particularly suitable for analyzingthe potential for expanding the implementation of more agroforestry systems. There ismore work needed on the environmental aspect of agroforestry.Land 2022, 11, 71 16 of 21These results are based on cross-sectional data that we only focused on a particularsystem, i.e., household/family farming. We recommend that longitudinal and combinedmethodologies be used and that more than one agricultural system be assessed in futureresearch. Last, we recommend that the KPK, Pakistan government launches such a projectthat supports and develops agroforestry and local economic development in the provincefor the long run. Lastly, with reference to the definition the percent of land covered bytress differs based on how crowded the trees are. This aspect should be considered infuture research.5. ConclusionsThis study assesses the impact of small-scale agroforestry on local economic develop-ment and livelihoods for selected districts in KPK, Pakistan. We contribute to the existingliterature on agroforestry by identifying the role of small-scale agroforestry in local eco-nomic development and building livelihoods resilience by utilizing advanced econometrictechniques. Using primary household survey data from 350 individuals and 12 qualita-tive case study households’ interviews, we find a positive influence impact of small-scaleagroforestry on livelihoods and economic development. Our results suggest that, on aver-age, households connected with small-scale agroforestry earn 6% more income and have23 percent more assets. Similarly, people from agroforestry report a higher rating of thesesmall-scale agroforestry farms for their livelihoods. Our results are robust for variousdimensions of small-scale agroforestry.This research provides comprehensive and empirical evidence on the relationship be-tween small-scale agroforestry livelihood resilience and local economic development. Thisresearch paper has five significant findings that may apply on a larger scale and in othercities of Pakistan or other countries. First, it provides direct evidence of the strong associa-tion between agroforestry building livelihoods resilience and local economic development,especially in Pakistan, where no such research or evidence has been established to date.Second, financial capital can be improved through agroforestry, which can improve othercapital assets. Moreover, agroforestry can build a livelihood capital base, which meansfarmers can deal with various livelihood shocks. Third, small-scale agroforestry bringsnon-financial benefits such as environmental sustainability, improved living standards,reduced soil erosion, and provided shade. Fourth, irrigation plays a vital role in buildinglivelihood resilience and promoting agroforestry. Lastly, on-farm diversity can be improvedthrough agroforestry.These findings are not limited to the selected cities of Pakistan; they have a broaderscope. The international development of projects related to agriculture should pay muchimportance to livelihood resilience to safeguard the interests of small to average growers.Governments and non-governmental organizations can use the results of this study toimprove the resilience, local economic development, and well-being of farmers everywherein the world. Although the percentage of results may vary from area to area, farmers willbenefit from livelihood resilience through agroforestry.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.Z., S.Z. and Y.Z.; methodology, M.A. and A.B.; writing,M.Z., S.Z., M.A. and Y.Z.; supervision, Y.Z., H.H., A.A.-M. and L.A.-C.; project administration; H.H.,A.A.-M. and L.A.-C.; funding acquisition, H.H., A.A.-M. and L.A.-C. All authors have read andagreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: The study presented in this paper was supported by the postdoc fund, Business schoolHenan university Kaifeng China.Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are ava