How different will this time be? Assessing the prospects for economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis

How different will this time be? Assessing the prospects for economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisisLSE Research Online URL for this paper: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/104304/Version: Published VersionOnline resource:Begg, Iain and Qian, Jun (2020) How different will this time be? Assessing the prospects for economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis. LSE COVID-19 Blog (23Apr 2020). Blog Entry. lseresearchonline@lse.ac.ukhttps://eprints.lse.ac.uk/ ReuseItems deposited in LSE Research Online are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved unless indicated otherwise. They may be downloaded and/or printed for private study, or other acts as permitted by national copyright laws. The publisher or other rights holders may allow further reproduction and re-use of the full text version. This is indicated by the licence information on the LSE Research Online record for the item.How	different	will	this	time	be?	Assessing	theprospects	for	economic	recovery	from	the	Covid-19crisisCovid-19	has	already	generated	a	sharp	fall	in	global	GDP	and	a	rapid	rise	inunemployment,	but	what	kind	of	recovery	can	we	expect	once	the	crisis	passes?	IainBegg	and	Jun	Qian	write	that	in	the	most	optimistic	scenario,	the	world	will	experience	areturn	to	trend	growth	once	lockdowns	are	lifted.	The	more	worrying	possibilities	are	thata	short-lived	recovery	could	be	followed	by	a	further	downturn,	or	that	the	outbreak	couldwipe	out	economic	capacity	permanently	in	some	countries,	with	trend	growth	resumingfrom	a	lower	base.V,	U,	W	or	L?	No,	these	are	not	answers	to	a	word	puzzle	or	some	obscure	form	of	cryptography,	but	symbols	todescribe	how	the	current	global	downturn,	expected	to	be	far	worse	than	during	the	financial	crisis	of	the	late2000s,	might	evolve.	Each	letter	represents	how	the	trajectory	of	GDP	would	appear	on	a	graph.With	the	world	economy	already	experiencing	a	sharp	fall	in	GDP	and	rapid	rises	in	unemployment,	forecastershave	been	struggling	to	work	out	how	big	it	will	be	and	how	long	it	will	last.	Projections	reported	by	Gita	Gopinath,the	IMF	Chief	Economist,	suggest	the	world	economy	will	shrink	by	3	percent	in	2020,	instead	of	3.3	percent	growthforecast	just	three	months	ago.	Assuming	an	early	peak	in	the	incidence	of	the	virus	(and	that	the	countervailingpolicies	are	successful),	it	will	recover	strongly	in	2021	to	achieve	growth	of	5.8	percent.The	downturn	is	exceptional	because	it	is	a	deliberate	policy	action.	By	putting	substantial	parts	of	the	economy	intohibernation,	the	aim	is	to	reduce	economic	and	social	interactions	so	as	to	curb	the	spread	of	Covid-19.	In	each	ofthe	four	symbols	this	is	captured	in	the	downward	swing.	Governments	are,	however,	under	considerable	pressureto	return	to	whatever	passes	for	normality	as	quickly	as	possible.‘V’	is	the	most	optimistic	scenario.	Its	downward	phase	will	quickly	be	followed	by	a	rebound:	a	sort	of	trampolineeffect.	A	‘U’	shape	would	imply	a	more	prolonged	period	of	stagnation	after	the	initial	fall,	but	an	eventual	return	totrend	growth.‘W’	and	‘L’	are	more	worrying.	The	former	implies	a	short-lived	recovery	would	be	followed	by	a	further	downturn,	asmight	occur	if	a	second	wave	of	infections	occurred.	During	the	euro	sovereign	debt	crisis,	many	countries	wereafflicted	by	such	double-dip	(even	treble)	recessions.‘L’	is	the	most	alarming,	because	it	could	arise	if	the	aftermath	of	the	lockdowns	wipes	out	economic	capacitypermanently,	instead	of	just	suspending	it.	This	effect	could	be	exacerbated	by	‘scarring’	of	workers	and	investors.Economies	would,	at	a	stroke,	have	seen	a	step-change	downwards,	with	trend	growth	resuming	from	a	lowerbase.The	Chinese	experienceChina,	as	the	first	country	to	enter	lockdown,	can	provide	some	insights	into	what	to	expect	elsewhere.	It	is,arguably,	already	past	the	trough	and	the	experience	of	SARS	in	2003	gave	grounds	for	optimism	of	a	‘V’	recovery.However,	Covid-19	rapidly	became	a	global	phenomenon,	rather	than	one	largely	confined	to	East	Asia,	and	thenegative	feedbacks	from	different	parts	of	the	global	economy	could	prove	far	more	debilitating	for	China.As	we	write	this	piece,	the	first	quarter	GDP	and	a	host	of	other	economic	indicators	have	been	released.	We	havecertainly	witnessed	the	first	stage	of	the	‘V’	(or	any	of	the	other	symbols):	for	the	first	time	in	more	than	40	years,the	Chinese	economy	contracted	in	a	quarter,	by	6.8%	from	the	same	period	a	year	ago;	Hubei	Province,	theepicentre	of	the	outbreak,	experienced	a	contraction	of	almost	40%.	Going	beyond	the	headline	figures,	exportsdropped	much	more	than	imports.	Investment	in	fixed	assets	and	consumption	(as	measured	by	total	retail	sales	ofconsumer	goods),	both	important	engines	for	growth,	fell	sharply	(by	more	than	15%)	in	the	first	two	months.LSE European Politics and Policy (EUROPP) Blog: How different will this time be? Assessing the prospects for economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis Page 1 of 3		Date originally posted: 2020-04-23Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/2020/04/23/how-different-will-this-time-be-assessing-the-prospects-for-economic-recovery-from-the-covid-19-crisis/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/On	the	positive	side,	the	Chinese	economy	started	to	recover	in	March.	In	particular,	all	indicators,	including	thosebased	on	satellite	images	showing	the	movements	of	people,	cars,	ships,	etc.,	as	well	as	parking	lots	of	factories,show	that	manufacturing	sectors,	including	steel	and	automobiles,	are	recovering	faster	than	services	sectors.These	patterns	are	unsurprising,	given	that	so	many	service	activities	require	large	groups	of	people	to	cometogether	in	the	acts	of	production	and	consumption.	In	addition,	SMEs	(small-	and	medium-sized	enterprises)	werehit	particularly	hard,	and	have	been	recovering	more	slowly	than	large	firms	in	all	industries	and	along	theproduct/supply	chains.	Collectively,	they	contribute	60%	of	China’s	GDP	and	80%	of	urban	employment,	and	clearlyneed	continued	assistance	from	the	government,	financial	institutions,	business	partners	and	communities	in	orderto	survive	and	recover.Outlook	for	other	countriesEven	if	China	continues	to	show	favourable	trends,	a	more	daunting	question	is	whether	other	major	countries	canemulate	its	recovery.	During	the	Great	Depression	of	the	1930s,	the	damage	to	economies	and	societies	was	soacute	and	lengthy	in	part	because	governments	adopted	the	wrong	policies	domestically	and	abroad:	domestically,instead	of	stimulus	there	were	austerity	measures;	and	globally,	trade	barriers	were	erected	rather	than	brokendown.The	good	news	today	is	that	governments	in	major	economies	rapidly	launched	extensive	monetary	and	fiscalmeasures	to	support	firms	and	households.	In	addition	to	these	domestic	measures,	which	can	lead	to	problemsand	risks	down	the	road,	a	powerful	stimulus	that	does	not	have	any	(economic)	side	effects	would	be	to	eliminatethe	tariffs	imposed	on	imported	goods	and	services;	even	a	temporary	pause	in	restrictive	trade	policies	would	helpfirms,	especially	SMEs,	and	consumers	immediately.Nevertheless,	reasons	for	concern	include:The	much	higher	share	of	personal	services	in	most	OECD	countries.	Manufacturing	accounts	for	nearly	30percent	of	the	economy	in	China	and	Korea,	20	percent	in	Germany,	15	percent	in	Italy,	11	percent	in	Spainand	the	US,	and	under	10	percent	in	France	and	the	UK.	As	noted	in	relation	to	China,	companies	in	thissector	can	resume	more	easily	than	in	services.Most,	often	small,	businesses	offering	personal	services	have	been	forced	to	suspend	trading	because	of	thelockdowns	and	many	will	not	survive.The	importance	of	tourism.	Major	destinations,	at	both	national	and	regional	level,	can	expect	a	big	drop	inincome.The	scale	of	public	debts	at	the	start	of	the	crisis	(Italy	is	among	the	most	worrying)	will	affect	the	risks	ofsubsequent	financial	instability.The	extent	of	the	lockdown	and	whether	it	was	less	intense	in	some	regions	or	affected	the	entire	country.Changes	in	behaviour	following	the	lockdowns:	will	demand	for	aviation,	office	working,	and	certain	leisureactivities	return	to	‘pre-corona’	levels?	If	not,	will	other	activities	expand	to	maintain	aggregate	demand?With	very	small	proportions	of	the	population	having	been	affected	by	the	virus,	fresh	outbreaks,	possiblyrequiring	further	quarantining,	could	occur.Another	factor	will	be	the	speed	of	recovery	of	global	product	and	supply	chains.	Since	firms,	industries	andeconomies	are	more	interconnected,	a	breakdown	in	any	key	component	or	link	will	lead	to	some	degree	ofbreakdown	of	the	entire	chain.	While	some	countries	may	have	a	strong	incentive	to	repatriate	‘critical’industries	after	the	crisis,	such	relocation	efforts	are	costly	and	take	time	to	implement	and	overall	economicefficiency	may	be	compromised.More	importantly,	during	the	recovery	process	the	quicker	the	global	chains	can	be	restored	–	more	likely	ifthere	is	broad	cooperation	among	firms	and	industries	–	the	faster	economies	can	be	back	on	track	forgrowth.Verdict	for	the	global	economyMuch,	will,	in	addition,	depend	on	how	successful	policymakers	are	in	delivering	their	stimulus	packages.	Taking	allsuch	factors	into	account,	China	is	likely	to	be	a	‘U’,	and	so	are	some	East	and	Southeast	Asian	economies	whichhave	extensive	trade	with	China,	but	there	is	a	risk	of	‘W’.	Some	service	intensive	European	countries	are	most	atrisk	of	an	‘L’,	and	the	US	also	risks	‘L’	for	the	same	reason	(unless	the	insurrection	against	State	Governors	beingfomented	by	Trump	prevails,	though	that	could	result	in	a	‘W’	or	even	a	double	‘W’).	The	biggest	question	mark	isover	large	developing	countries	where	the	virus	has	not	(yet)	had	so	severe	an	impact.LSE European Politics and Policy (EUROPP) Blog: How different will this time be? Assessing the prospects for economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis Page 2 of 3		Date originally posted: 2020-04-23Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/2020/04/23/how-different-will-this-time-be-assessing-the-prospects-for-economic-recovery-from-the-covid-19-crisis/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/If	most	of	the	largest	and	developed	economies	can	more	or	less	contain	the	outbreak	by	the	summer	and	start	therecovery	process	during	the	third	quarter	of	2020,	then	a	global	‘V’	recovery	by	the	end	of	the	year	is	possible.However,	given	the	patterns	of	the	second	wave	of	the	outbreak	already	observed	in	some	Asian	countries(Singapore),	it	is	also	possible	that	a	second	wave	of	outbreaks	will	occur	in	a	number	of	large	economies,	andhence	we	will	see	a	‘W’,	with	the	higher-than-trend	growth	phrase	postponed	until	the	first	half	of	2021	or	later.It	is	in	the	common	interests	of	all	to	avoid	an	‘L’	shaped	recovery,	and	to	do	so,	cooperation	among	all	economiesis	vital.	Is	the	G20	listening?Please	read	our	comments	policy	before	commenting.Note:	This	article	gives	the	views	of	the	authors,	not	the	position	of	EUROPP	–	European	Politics	and	Policy	or	theLondon	School	of	Economics.	Featured	image	credit:	IMF	(CC	BY-NC-ND	2.0)_________________________________About	the	authorsIain	Begg	–	LSEIain	Begg	is	a	Professor	at	the	LSE’s	European	Institute	and	co-Director	of	the	Dahrendorf	Forum.–Jun	Qian	–	Fudan	UniversityJun	Qian	is	a	Professor	of	Finance	and	Executive	Dean	at	Fanhai	International	School	ofFinance,	Fudan	University.LSE European Politics and Policy (EUROPP) Blog: How different will this time be? Assessing the prospects for economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis Page 3 of 3		Date originally posted: 2020-04-23Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/2020/04/23/how-different-will-this-time-be-assessing-the-prospects-for-economic-recovery-from-the-covid-19-crisis/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/