Digital Communication Management Government of the Republic of Indonesia for Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Recovery in Indonesia

TSBECTransdisciplinary Symposium on Business, Economics, and CommunicationVolume 2023Conference PaperDigital Communication ManagementGovernment of the Republic of Indonesia forInclusive and Sustainable Economic Recoveryin IndonesiaSaktisyahputra, Yuli Evitha, Sukarni Novita Sari, Degdo Suprayitno, Jhulian-fika IrriandaCommunication Management Study Program, Faculty of Social Sciences and Management,STIAMI Institute of Social Sciences and Management, IndonesiaORCIDSaktisyahputra: https://orcid.org/0009-0006-3307-8439Abstract.Since 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has affected not only Indonesia but also othercountries in the world. The economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic has beenfelt by the Indonesian people since the implementation of the large-scale socialrestrictions (PSBB) on March 15, 2020. Community activities are forced to be carriedout through digital transformation in services, transactions, and work, for example, theGovernment of the Republic of Indonesia. This research was conducted to determinethe digital communication management planning, activities, and evaluation of theGovernment of the Republic of Indonesia in an inclusive and sustainable economicrecovery in Indonesia. The objective of this research is the Government of the Republicof Indonesia. This study uses the method of Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl.Having the concept of phenomenology as a scientific method that does not start withdoubt, direction, and the truth of an experience. Data were collected by means ofobservation, interviews, and documentation. Data analysis techniques in this studyuse data reduction, data display, and verification of Miles and Huberman. Based onthe data findings, data results, and discussions that the researchers have submitted, itcan be concluded that the Government of the Republic of Indonesia has implementedDigital Communication Management both from planning, activities, and evaluationin inclusive and sustainable economic recovery through the importance of directedand coordinated digital communication planning through agenda setting and framingare well conceptualized. Digital communication planning of the Government of theRepublic of Indonesia through the Ministry of Communication and Information of theRepublic of Indonesia, the Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy of the Republicof Indonesia and the Ministry of Cooperatives of MSMEs of the Republic of Indonesiahas been going well with many trainings held so that there are many benefits for thecommunity.Keywords: management, communication, digital, government, indonesia, economyHow to cite this article: Saktisyahputra, Yuli Evitha, Sukarni Novita Sari, Degdo Suprayitno, Jhulianfika Irrianda, (2023), “Digital CommunicationManagement Government of the Republic of Indonesia for Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Recovery in Indonesia” in TransdisciplinarySymposium on Business, Economics, and Communication, KnE Social Sciences, pages 621–631. DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710Page 621Corresponding Author:Saktisyahputra; email:Saktinabil@gmail.comPublished 18 July 2023Publishing services provided byKnowledge ESaktisyahputra et al. Thisarticle is distributed under theterms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License, whichpermits unrestricted use andredistribution provided that theoriginal author and source arecredited.Selection and Peer-review underthe responsibility of the TSBECConference Committee.TSBEC1. IntroductionThe COVID-19 pandemic has occurred in the world since 2020, not only in Indonesiabut also in all countries in the world. The economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemichas been felt by the Indonesian people since the implementation of the Large-ScaleSocial Restrictions (PSBB) on March 15, 2020.Social media and digital media on the internet are the gateways to open digitalcommunication. Why can it be said so? This is because most of the population fromall over the world is now connected to the internet – Indonesia even in many studiesalways ranks one to five as the country with the highest number of accounts anduploads of content on social media, the network that occurs between individuals isalso increasingly global, starting to blur the barriers of space and time, the hierarchy isincreasingly limitless, to the content that floods the digital medium.For institutions or organizations, it provides a kind of alternative for informationdissemination, activation, public and business communication, as well as public relationsand business activities for institutions. This digital media then also provides changesand even revolutions in the relationship between institutions and audiences. Duringthis time, communication tends to be dominated by one-way and broadcast type, butnow it has turned into interactivity where both institutions and audiences are entities (ininternet language it is called nodes) that are comparable, are in the same network, andcan influence. For example, branding (branding) now digital audiences can constructtrust and sentiment through trending topics, viral, as well as issues discussed and stored(databases and archives) that can be accessed anywhere and anytime [1].The world is currently experiencing a better and sustainable economic recoveryafter being impacted by the economic health of the Covid 19 pandemic which wasfelt throughout the world, including the economy in Indonesia, especially Micro, Smalland Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). Communication has a big contribution to help amore inclusive and sustainable economic recovery in Indonesia, including digital com-munication. This can be seen by the trend of digital communication research whichis of interest to the world community. Likewise, the development of communicationtechnology and digitalization of media has made the communication industry morecreative and innovative and is needed by the Indonesian people today.The digital communication research trend is on the rise and is popular nowadays. Thisis evidenced by many researchers conducting research and publications in internationaljournals discussing digital communication. Like [2–16].DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 622TSBECBased on the formulation of the problem above, the purpose of this study is to find outDigital Communication Management Planning, Activities and Evaluation Government ofthe Republic of Indonesia for Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Recovery in Indonesia.2. Research MethodsThe research method in this study used the Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl. Theway to practice the phenomenological method is to reduce non-essential elementsthrough epoche, namely placing in brackets the non-essential elements until conscious-ness can grasp the essence of reality [17].Communication planning is an important part of the digital communication manage-ment process. Conceptually, communication management can be defined as a setof techniques used in public relations activities and accompanying activities to runprograms, campaigns, or projects [18].In simple terms, planning can be grouped into four clusters, namely strategy, content,promotion, and conversion.2.1. StrategyFirst, Market research (market research): explaining the target audience, segmentation ofthe planned target age, situation or demographics. Second Campaign Goals (campaigngoals): What social media channels are used? Types of content based on social media ?Third Publication Channels (publication channels): What social media channels do youuse? Types of content based on social media ? The four promotion channels: the choiceof the channel (media) and the type of paid promotion used. Then the fifth is the KeyPerformance Indicators (KPIs). The performance index will be discussed in a separatesection.2.2. ContentThe first is Keyword Analysis: What keywords are popular in the minds of the public?Keywords based on internet algorithms ? What keywords will be optimized on socialmedia? Second Content Planning (Content Planning): Outline of the campaign content? Content calendar plan ? Third, Content Creation: Writing content according to socialmedia algorithms, choosing the right hashtags, content according to SEO.DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 623TSBEC2.3. PromotionFirst is Organic Media (Organic Media): Email blast concept, Newsletter, Content Tem-plate, IG Story, FB Story, Facebook Page. The second is doing Paid Promotion: Do youuse Google Ads? Facebook Ads? Instagram Ads?2.4. ConversionThe first is Follow Up Action: Engaging the audience in a webinar ? events? Discount? Quiz ? Downloadable e-books? Videos ? The second is to do a Media Offer: Settingup a landing page as a conversion link that is distributed on social media? IG page ?Special page? [1].2.5. Evaluation in digital communicationIn the final stage of digital communication management, the institution conducts anevaluation. Evaluation is also interpreted as monitoring (monitoring) and also seekingfeedback.The management of digital communication media, as discussed in the humanresources section, is carried out by a section that specifically handles digital com-munications. This means that it is the managers themselves who know better how adigital communication plan is made, how the execution of the plan is, to what kind ofoutput, impact, and results are desired [1].The objects used as informants in this study were Mr. Oman Sukmana as a DigitalCommunication Practitioner, Vice President Corporate Communication and StakeholderRelations of PT Sarana Multigriya Finansial (Persero) (State-Owned Enterprises Underthe Ministry of Finance RI), Mr. Aditya Ramadhan, a Digital Communication Practitionerfrom the Content Association Indonesian Creator dan Bapak Khabib Astoni, ST., M.KomKepala Bagian E-Learning Insitut Ilmu Sosial dan Manajemen STIAMI yang tinggaldi Kampung Selang Nangka RT 01 RW 30 Kelurahan Wanasari Kecamatan CibitungKabupaten Bekasi – Jawa Barat . The total number of informants is three people. Thisinformant is seen to represent what he wants to study and is selected based on thecontext that the researcher wants to discuss in this study.There are two main things that affect the quality of research data, namely, the qualityof research instruments, and the quality of data collection. The quality of researchinstruments is related to the validity and reliability of the instrument and the quality ofDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 624TSBECdata collection is related to the accuracy of the methods used to collect data. Therefore,an instrument that has been tested for validity and reliability may not necessarily producevalid and reliable data, if the instrument is not used properly in data collection.Data collection can be done in various settings, various sources, and in variousways. When viewed from the setting, data can be collected in a natural setting, ina laboratory using an experimental method, at home with various respondents, at aseminar, discussion, on the road and so on. Furthermore, when viewed in terms ofdata collection methods or techniques, data collection techniques can be carried outby interview (interview), questionnaire (questionnaire), observation (observation), and acombination of the three [19].Data analysis in qualitative research is carried out during data collection and afterdata collection is completed within a certain period. At the time of the interview, theresearcher had analyzed the answers from the interviewees. If the answers interviewedafter being analyzed feel unsatisfactory, the researcher will continue the question untilthe stage of obtaining data that is considered credible. Miles and Huberman [20]suggested that activities in qualitative data analysis were carried out interactively andcontinued until they were saturated. Activities in data analysis are: data reduction, datadisplay, and verification.Thus, conclusions in qualitative research may be able to answer the problem for-mulation that was formulated from the start. But maybe not, because the problem andproblem formulation in qualitative research is still temporary and will develop after theresearch is in the field. The conclusions of qualitative research are expected to benew findings that have never existed. Findings can be in the form of a descriptionor description of the object of research that was previously dim or dark so that afterresearch it becomes clear, it can be a causal or interactive relationship, hypothesis, ortheory [21].3. Research Results and DiscussionResearchers conducted interviews with key informant Mr. Oman Sukmana 45 years oldliving in Komp. Kologad RT01/07 No 82, Jatimakmur, Pondok Gede, Bekasi, West Java.Communication planning is an important part of the digital communication managementprocess. Conceptually, communication management can be defined as a set of tech-niques used in public relations activities and accompanying activities to run programs,DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 625TSBECcampaigns, or projects [18]. The Importance of Directed and Coordinated Digital Com-munication Planning Through a well-conceived Agenda Setting and Framing. This is inaccordance with the statement of Mr. Oman Sukmana as follows:“Digital communication today is a necessity. Along with the development of infor-mation and communication technology, communication through digital is no longeran alternative but instead becomes the main choice. It must be admitted that themainstream media, which was previously the main choice for PR people in carrying outtheir program campaigns, are now starting to be abandoned, although the Indonesiangovernment has not completely forgotten it, in this case including ministries, institutionsor state-owned enterprises who are fully aware of the importance of digital communi-cation. Especially by looking at the development of digital users who continue to growfrom year to year. In 2022, of the approximately 270 million Indonesian population,digital users are estimated to reach 190 million people or reaching 70 percent ofthe total population in Indonesia. It can be ascertained that currently all Ministries,institutions and SOEs already have and utilize this digital communication as an assetto build a brand. That is what the government through ministries, institutions andalso state-owned enterprises did when Indonesia was hit by the COVID-19 pandemic,for more than 2 years. Communication through digital is the main media chosen bythe government to continue campaigning and socializing what the government isdoing, has been and will be doing in an effort to accelerate and support an inclusiveand sustainable economic recovery. The digital communication planning is carriedout in a directed and coordinated manner through a well-conceived agenda settingand framing. This well-integrated digital communication also received a lot of praise,including from other countries, when Indonesia was able to deal with and handlethe problems of the COVID-19 pandemic well. Through digital communication thatis conceptualized, directed and integrated, Indonesia is currently entering a betterstage, namely the stage of economic stabilization as the national economy recoversand recovers.”The researcher also conducted interviews with a 25-year-old Digital CommunicationPractitioner Informant, Aditya Ramadhan, who lives at Jalan Al-Bashor Gang H. AliNumber 47 Hamlet, Kramat Jati, East Jakarta. Communication planning is an importantpart of the digital communication management process. Conceptually, communicationmanagement can be defined as a set of techniques used in public relations activities andaccompanying activities to run programs, campaigns, or projects [18]. Digital Communi-cation Planning of the Government of the Republic of Indonesia through the Ministry ofCommunication and Information of the Republic of Indonesia, the Ministry of TourismDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 626TSBECand Creative Economy of the Republic of Indonesia and the Ministry of Cooperatives ofMSMEs of the Republic of Indonesia has been going well with many trainings held sothat there are many benefits for the community. This is in accordance with Mr. Aditya’sstatement as follows:“From my point of view, the Government of the Republic of Indonesia’s DigitalCommunications Planning is building an inclusive and sustainable economic recoveryin Indonesia. If I can say that the first step taken by the Government of the Republic ofIndonesia is indeed correct, namely making many programs for human empowerment,especially MSMEs. The increase in MSMEs is not only carried out by business peoplebut also to personalities. An example of a personal program is digitalent from theMinistry of Communication and Information of the Republic of Indonesia. The DigitalentProgram from the Indonesian Ministry of Communication and Informatics provides alot of training related to the current digital world and that will increase competenceand national workforce absorption so that ”unemployed” people who do not havecertification will eventually gain competence. This is also a good application in termsof communication on social media, it is busy talking about the registration campaignso that the benefits of the programs from the Government of the Republic of Indonesiacan already be felt, so I dare say that the target is fixed. However, many in manyMSME sectors themselves have a lot of contact with the Indonesian Ministry of MSMECooperatives, which also provides a lot of business and entrepreneurship training tothe community, especially MSMEs. Funding, campaigns and even Ministry logos arenow being worked on by competitions from local designers from young Indonesians.So you don’t use an outside agency, you use a national competition. This can improvethe economy. In terms of communication planning, the Government of the Republic ofIndonesia has done the right thing, so many benefits can be felt. Social media socialmedia used by influencers are also now many that intersect with the government. Atthe Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy of the Republic of Indonesia, there aremany Influencer trainings and so on. This can also increase the level of the economy.The digital communication stage is complete and the benefits can already be felt. Ourindicators can also see that there are a lot of local products scattered around. Sometime ago I went to Sumedang and it turned out that many of my local products cameto Sumedang to see Cilembu Sweet Potatoes. It turns out that this Cilembu sweetpotato has the power to be exported and it is fostered by the Ministry of Tourism andCreative Economy of the Republic of Indonesia, how to compare local products to beintroduced to Europeanmarkets, all handmade and this is done continuously every yearand also makes local products. develop. This has an impact and also economically,DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 627TSBECit certainly provides new opportunities, new markets, especially for MSMEs and alsolocal products.”TheGovernment of the Republic of Indonesia has implemented digital communicationactivities strategically and made targets that can be empowered for economic recovery.However, in simple terms, digital communication activities can be grouped into fourclusters, namely strategy, content, promotion, and conversion [18]. This is in accordancewith Mr. Aditya’s statement as follows:”So, in terms of strategically assisting the government’s economic recovery activities,the government has certainly targeted which targets can be empowered for economicrecovery. Like the example above, from a personal perspective, the Government con-tinues to invite the public to take part in training related to the digital creative economy.As for MSMEs, there are also events for capital and so on. In terms of content, everycampaign that is created is also made into a container, such as a new social media,create a new domain and then people interact on social media and then get promoted,not even a little promoted with advertising media such as Facebook and InstagramAds and the conversion is of course the people who are invited will be converted tojoin the class to join the program to produce empowerment events that are beneficialfor the community”The importance of evaluating the use of social media such as Facebook, Instagramand Tik Tok in disseminating events carried out by the Government of the Republicof Indonesia. In the final stage of digital communication management, the institutionconducts an evaluation. Evaluation is also interpreted as monitoring (monitoring) andalso seeking feedback. The management of digital communication media, as discussedin the human resources section, is carried out by a section that specifically handlesdigital communications. This means that it is the managers themselves who know betterhow a digital communication plan is made, how the execution of the plan is, to whatkind of outputs, impacts, and results are desired [18]. This is in accordance with Mr.Aditya’s statement as follows:”Yes, for evaluation, maybe I will comment on the digital communication, first, if theprogram is good, right. However, in terms of brand activation or applications, it can bepromoted again, meaning that if there is a program, the budget for certain events canbe disseminated more widely with media with more users. Like giving it on Facebook,Instagram or Tik-Tok, because not all events and programs to improve the economyare carried out openly to the public. But at least it can be made for segments thatare more affected. For example, the MSME version of the Government of the Republicof Indonesia is MSME that has legality but there are many MSMEs that do not haveDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 628TSBEClegality that do not touch but how to reach communication effectively to people who areaffected, but do not meet the requirements. there is no need to intersect with agenciesbecause there are so many MSMEs there that do not intersect but are affected andsometimes do not know that with existing programs. So it’s more towards channelsand branding, using more mainstream media and maybe increasing advertising costsso that the socialization of programs for economic revival can be more beneficial.”The researcher also conducted interviews with a Mr. Khabib Astoni, ST., M.Kom, 34years old as Head of the E-Learning Section of the STIAMI Institute of Social Sciencesand Management who lives in Selang Nangka Village RT 01 RW 30 Wanasari Village,Cibitung District, Bekasi Regency - Java West.4. ConclusionBased on the Data Findings, Data Results and Discussions that the researchers havesubmitted, it can be concluded that the Government of the Republic of Indonesia hasimplemented Digital Communication Management both from Planning, Activities andEvaluation in Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Recovery through the Importance ofDirected and Coordinated Digital Communication Planning through Agenda Setting andFraming are well conceptualized. Digital Communication Planning of the Governmentof the Republic of Indonesia through the Ministry of Communication and Informationof the Republic of Indonesia, the Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy of theRepublic of Indonesia and the Ministry of Cooperatives of MSMEs of the Republic ofIndonesia has been going well with many trainings held so that there are many benefitsfor the community. The Government of the Republic of Indonesia has implementeddigital communication activities strategically and made targets that can be empoweredfor economic recovery. The importance of evaluating the use of social media such asFacebook, Instagram and Tik Tok in disseminating events carried out by the Governmentof the Republic of Indonesia. The recommendation is that the Government of theRepublic of Indonesia can synergize with Content Creators such as Youtubers andSelebgrams to strengthen and disseminate events and trainings that can help inclusiveand sustainable economic recovery in Indonesia. Second, theGovernment of the Repub-lic of Indonesia can better adapt to technological developments, digital communicationstarting from research, content, promotion and conversion to be able to help an inclusiveand sustainable economic recovery in Indonesia. Third, the Government of the Republicof Indonesia to always evaluate the planning and activities of digital communicationsDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 629TSBECto be able to improve in the future in helping an inclusive and sustainable economicrecovery in Indonesia.References[1] Nasrullah R. Teori dan Riset Khalayak Media. Jakarta: Kencana; 2021.[2] Sarah ML, Krøtel. Digital Communication of Public Service Information and its Effecton Citizens’ Perception of Received Information. Int J Public Adm. 2019;44(2):132–45.[3] Aboh SC, Ezeudo OC. Interactions on facebook and twitter: A communicative actionperspective. Theory Pract Lang Stud. 2020;10(11):1351–8.[4] Permatasari AN, Soelistiyowati E, Suastami IGAPP, Johan RA. Digital Public Relations:Trend and Required Skills. J ASPIKOM. 2021;6(2):373–86.[5] Romero-Hall E, Petersen E, Sindicic R, Li L. Most versus least used social media:undergraduate students’ preferences, participation, lurking, and motivational factors.Int J Soc Media Interact Learn Environ. 2020;6(3):244–66.[6] Nti IK, Adekoya AF, Opoku M, Nimbe P. Synchronising social media into teachingand learning settings at tertiary education. Int J Soc Media Interact Learn Environ.2020;6(3):230–43.[7] Charalambous A. Social media and health policy. Asia-Pacific J Oncol Nurs.2019;6(1):24–7.[8] Uitz I. Social Media – Is It Worth The Trouble? J Internet Soc Netw VirtualCommunities. 2012;2012:1–14.[9] Al-Ghafri RK, Al-Badi AH, Al-Ghafri K. Users’ Activities on Social Media as indicatorsof Self-Esteem: a Case Study in Oman. J Internet Soc Netw Virtual Communities.2016;2016.[10] Vaterlaus JM, Patten E V, Spruance LA. #Alonetogether: An Exploratory Study ofSocial Media Use at the Beginning of the COVID-19 Pandemic. J Soc Media Soc.2022;11(1):27–45.[11] Salafia C, Diplacido J. Social Media and Vaping: The Role of Social Norms andMotives. 2022;11(1):3–26.[12] Sajane S, Gaikwad H. Research on the Impact of Social Media on Business/Startups.Int J Entrep Technopreneur. 2022;2:13–22.[13] Wilantika N, Wibisono SB. Evaluating the quality of public services through socialmedia. Asian J Public Opin Res. 2021;9(3):240–65.DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 630TSBEC[14] Akbar GG, Kurniadi D, Nurliawati N. Content Analysis of Social Media: Public andGovernment Response to COVID-19 Pandemic in Indonesia. J Ilmu Sos dan IlmuPolit. 2021;25(1):16–31.[15] Jernigan S. How to change the world: the relationship between social mediaand social change in the classroom. Int J Soc Media Interact Learn Environ.2020;6(3):169–80.[16] Längle S. Star Wars science on social media! Using pop culture to improve STEMskills. Int J Soc Media Interact Learn Environ. 2019;6(2):137–49.[17] Poespowardojo TS, Seran A. Filsafat Ilmu Pengetahuan Hakikat Ilmu Pengetahuan,Kritik terhadap Visi Positivisme Logis, serta Implikasinya. Jakarta: PT Kompas MediaNusantara; 2015.[18] Nasrullah R. Manajemen Komunikasi Digital Perencanaan, Aktivitas dan Evaluasi.Jakarta: PrenadaMedia; 2021.[19] Sugiyono. Metode Penelitian Komunikasi (Kuantitatif, Kualitatif dan Cara MudahMenulis Artikel pada Jurnal Internasional. Bandung: Alfabeta; 2021.[20] Miles M, Huberman M. Analisis Data Kualitatif: Buku Sumber Tentang Metode–metode Baru. 1992;747–2829.[21] Ronda M. Tafsir Kontemporer Ilmu Komunikasi Tinjauan Teoritis EpistemologiAksiologi. Jakarta: Indigo Media Bekerja Sama dengan Yayasan Kompatibel; 2018.DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i12.13710 Page 631