Economic insecurity impacts both groups with traditional and progressive values – all parties have a stake in improving work and financial resilience

Economic	insecurity	impacts	both	groups	withtraditional	and	progressive	values	–	all	parties	have	astake	in	improving	work	and	financial	resilienceIn	December	2020,	the	RSA	polled	the	UK	public	on	their	economic	security,	values,	politicaloutlook	and	policy	preferences.	Using	cluster	analysis,	they	created	seven	‘snapshots’,	based	onthe	values	and	economic	security	of	different	groups.	Will	Grimond	introduces	the	three	mostinsecure	groups	identified.Precarity	is	one	of	the	defining	features	of	the	21st	century	economy.	The	issue	has	been	thrustinto	the	political	limelight	in	recent	years,	as	progressives	look	to	deal	with	a	problem	which	isimpacting	their	key	constituencies,	and	creating	new,	unfamiliar	groups.	Conversations	around	the	direction	of	theLabour	party	have	focused	on	economic	security	–	evident	in	the	never-ending	conversation	on	how	to	win	backelusive	‘red	wall’	voters.	Joe	Biden’s	2020	campaign	also	focused	heavily	on	areas	with	high	levels	of	poverty,	andon	the	shrinking	American	‘middle	class’	as	a	changing	job	market,	rising	costs	of	living,	and	economic	precarityreach	higher	up	the	food	chain.Economic	insecurity	is	rife	in	the	UK	–	a	quarter	of	us	would	struggle	to	pay	an	unexpected	bill	of	£100.	The	term	isdistinct	from	traditional	understandings	of	poverty	and	inequality	in	that	it	aims	to	encapsulate	the	experience	felt	bythose	barely	keeping	afloat	–	those	who	‘just	about	manage’	–	and	also	seeks	to	consider	the	whole	range	ofimpacts	which	manifest	from	financial	difficulty.	Economic	security	is	as	much	a	measure	of	wellbeing	and	mentalhealth	as	it	is	one	of	assets	and	income.To	better	understand	how	economic	insecurity	is	affecting	the	UK	population,	we	carried	out	a	segmentationexercise,	looking	both	at	determinants	of	economic	security	and	the	values	of	the	public.	Values	tell	us	a	lot	–understanding	different	value	groups	is	useful	from	a	party-political	perspective,	and	also	allows	us	to	consider	howdifferent	policy	interventions	might	be	received.	We	asked	questions	on	societal	issues	like	diversity,	theimportance	of	tradition,	and	care	for	the	environment	–	and	personal	ones,	such	as	their	perceived	class	attributesand	level	of	optimism.British Politics and Policy at LSE: Economic insecurity impacts both groups with traditional and progressive values – all parties have a stake in improvingwork and financial resiliencePage 1 of 3		Date originally posted: 2021-03-12Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/snapshots-insecurity/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/Our	findings	suggest	that	economic	security	has	varied	impacts	for	different	groups.	The	three	most	insecuregroups	that	we	identified	–	which	we	have	termed	the	metropolitan	precariat,	the	progressive	working	class	and	thediscontented	right	–	each	suffer	precarity	in	different	ways.The	metropolitan	precariat	complain	of	high	housing	costs,	arduous	working	hours,	and	fluctuating	paycheques.They	are	the	youngest	of	all	of	our	groups,	with	the	highest	proportion	of	BAME,	and	they	are	an	urban	andrelatively	high-income	group.	The	discontented	right,	meanwhile,	are	more	middle-aged.	They	suffer	from	extremefinancial	difficulties	–	over	two-thirds	would	struggle	to	pay	an	unexpected	bill	of	£100,	and	over	half	are	in	worryinglevels	of	debt.	They	have	higher	levels	of	unemployment,	complain	of	a	lack	of	job	security,	and	hold	highlytraditional	views	on	a	range	of	issues.	Our	final	insecure	group,	the	progressive	working	class,	are	likely	to	be	morerural.	Their	concerns	centre	on	the	lack	of	opportunity	in	their	local	areas,	and	they	would	like	to	see	thegovernment	reduce	regional	inequalities.These	segments	are	also	the	most	at	risk	from	having	their	jobs	automated	–	our	economically	insecure	groups	arethe	most	likely	to	say	that	new	technology	is	a	threat	to	their	job.	Automation	may	have	accelerated	during	thepandemic,	as	firms	look	to	replace	their	now-vulnerable	human	capital;	research	has	found	that	lower-paid	jobs	areat	the	highest	risk	of	being	replaced	by	robots.Politically,	there	is	no	easy	roadmap	to	building	a	coalition	between	all	three	of	these	groups.	They	have	verydifferent	opinions	on	issues	like	diversity,	feminism,	and	the	importance	of	British	values,	and	an	appeal	to	valuesmay	struggle	to	meet	those	of	all	three.	There	are	also	significant	differences	in	their	approach	to	politics	andeconomics	–	the	discontented	right,	for	instance,	are	among	the	least	likely	to	want	to	increase	taxes	to	expand	thewelfare	state,	while	the	metropolitan	precariat	are	strongly	in	favour.These	findings	also	highlight	the	challenges	faced	by	young	people:	of	our	two	young	groups,	one	faces	extremeprecarity,	the	other	financial	surety,	steady	incomes,	and	good	job	prospects.	These	groups	are	both	among	themost	likely	to	be	in	full-time	employment,	but	one	group	is	not	being	rewarded	for	their	efforts,	and	face	issues	likefluctuating	paycheques	and	excessive	working	hours.	The	other,	meanwhile,	enjoys	a	stable	income,	high	rates	ofhome	ownership,	and	opportunities	for	career	progression.Despite	this,	there	are	commonalities	between	Britain’s	new	tribes.	There	is	consensus	on	issues	like	meeting	ourclimate	targets	and	including	citizens	more	in	the	political	process.	There	are	also	signs	of	solidarity	–	all	agree	thattoday’s	young	people	have	a	harder	time	financially	than	previous	generations,	for	instance.And	there	are	things	that	can	be	done	to	tackle	precarity.	The	issues	faced	by	the	progressive	working	class	speakto	concerns	about	economic	agency	and	place:	devolving	welfare	policy	could	be	a	step	toward	ensuring	thateconomic	policy	is	better	tailored	to	local	and	regional	communities.	A	focus	on	‘good	work’	–	which	has	fallen	offthe	agenda	in	the	current	government	–	will	be	crucial	to	making	sure	our	younger	precariat	have	the	in-worksupport	they	need.	Providing	a	living	wage	and	putting	a	stop	to	intrusive	workplace	monitoring	would	be	first	steps.British Politics and Policy at LSE: Economic insecurity impacts both groups with traditional and progressive values – all parties have a stake in improvingwork and financial resiliencePage 2 of 3		Date originally posted: 2021-03-12Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/snapshots-insecurity/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/This	should	come	with	a	renewed	emphasis	on	job	security,	especially	as	industries	are	hit	with	the	twin	threats	ofautomation	and	COVID-19-related	lockdowns.	Economic	insecurity	will	continue	to	grow	as	economic	andtechnological	change	pushes	previously	secure	groups	to	the	margins,	and	policymakers	will	have	to	navigate	awidening	gap	in	the	values	of	the	public.	But	there	are	things	that	can	be	done,	now,	to	tackle	precarity	in	the	UK	–and	as	we	come	out	of	the	pandemic,	the	case	has	never	been	more	urgent._____________________About	the	AuthorWill	Grimond	is	media	and	communications	officer	at	the	Royal	Society	for	Arts.			British Politics and Policy at LSE: Economic insecurity impacts both groups with traditional and progressive values – all parties have a stake in improvingwork and financial resiliencePage 3 of 3		Date originally posted: 2021-03-12Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/snapshots-insecurity/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/