Green Economy as a Law for the Economic Recovery Post Covid-19 Amidst the Increasing Cross-border E-commerce in Indonesia

INCLAR3rd International Conference on Law Reform (3rd INCLAR)Volume 2022Conference PaperGreen Economy as a Law for the EconomicRecovery Post Covid-19 Amidst the IncreasingCross-border E-commerce in IndonesiaAhmad Sabirin, Ariyoza Aryaputera Budi, Febrian Duta Adhiyaksa, BiancaPutri Aurelya, Sabila Ridwan, Jihad Ramadhan Lesmana, Fahreza DestiroAliftaTrisakti University, Business Law, West Jakarta, Jakarta, IndonesiaORCIDAhmad Sabirin: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8209-6581Abstract.The development of information technology pushed the economic ecosystem towarddigital. The convenience provided in online shopping through e-commerce hasincreased the number of trades in Indonesia. Currently, economic activities are not onlycarried out domestically but also occur in non-domestic trade. This digitalization bringshigh competitiveness to domestic and non-domestic business actors. This paper aimsto convey that the Green Economy policy is a solution to increase the accelerationof economic recovery in Indonesia post Covid-19 pandemic. The paper is used fornormative juridical research. According to Indonesia’s economic records, online tradetransactions grew in a positive direction during the Covid-19 pandemic, reaching 70percent throughout 2020 and in 2022, Lazada reported 73% customers in SoutheastAsia see online shopping as a part of their daily life. If we see, although there is anincrease, it is not significant. On this occasion, regulatory reforms are needed in orderto help accelerate the Indonesian digital economy post the pandemic. However, thislaw is deemed insufficient so regulations and/or legal norms that specifically regulatedigital trade are needed, especially regarding cross-border e-commerce. Besides, tradeactivities are closely related to monopolistic and unfair competition, so it is necessary toform binding agreements both within Indonesia and international countries to preventany acts of abuse of international trade progress. In achieving this goal, it is not onlythe role of the government but also necessary steps such as the establishment ofgreen regulation, green government, and green e-commerce.Keywords: green economy, economic recovery, cross-border e-commerce, postCovid-191. INTRODUCTIONRecovery in various aspects of life post Covid-19 pandemic in general has graduallyoccurred in Indonesia. However, recovery will depend on the economic structure andgovernance of both the central and local is well. Talking about accelerating the recoveryof economic conditions post Covid-19 pandemic, it is necessary to involve variousparties, including civil society, private sector so that economic growth is balanced [1].How to cite this article: Ahmad Sabirin, Ariyoza Aryaputera Budi, Febrian Duta Adhiyaksa, Bianca Putri Aurelya, Sabila Ridwan, JihadRamadhan Lesmana, Fahreza Destiro Alifta , (2022), “Green Economy as a Law for the Economic Recovery Post Covid-19 Amidst the IncreasingCross-border E-commerce in Indonesia” in 3rd International Conference on Law Reform (3rd INCLAR), KnE Social Sciences, pages 25–42.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072Page 25Corresponding Author: AhmadSabirin; email:achmadshobirinfull@gmail.comPublished: 4 October 2022Publishing services provided byKnowledge EAhmad Sabirin et al. Thisarticle is distributed under theterms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License, whichpermits unrestricted use andredistribution provided that theoriginal author and source arecredited.Selection and Peer-review underthe responsibility of the INCLARConference Committee.INCLARWe agree that Covid-19 pandemic has caused a decline in the economy and activities invarious sectors and regions in Indonesia. Despite the economic shock due to Covid-19pandemic, it is now gradually easing as the domestic financial market stabilizes andseveral economic sectors are thriving [2].The convenience provided in online shopping or e-commerce in Indonesia hasincreased every year. Based on the e-Conomy SEA 2021 report issued by Google, Bain& Company stated that Indonesia has the largest digital economic growth potential inSoutheast Asia. Indonesia’s digital economy potential in 2025 could reach US$ 146billion by 2025. Bank Indonesia (BI) noted that online trading transactions or throughe-commerce grew in a positive direction during pandemic conditions. This increase isprojected to reach Rp429 trillion throughout 2020 [3]. Seeing this situation, the lossesthat can be calculated are aggregate losses nationally. However, because the aggregatelosses are macro in nature, this calculation can only be used by large-scale economicactors, or by the state in preparing the revised State Revenue and Expenditure Budget(APBN). One way to calculate aggregate losses can be using the reference GrossDomestic Product (GDP), which is the total accumulation of production in a countryfor a year [4].Several countries in the world have experienced an economic recession due to theCovid-19 pandemic. This happened after economic growth in the first and second quar-ters of 2020 became negative [5]. Several countries experiencing economic recessioninclude Singapore, South, France, Hong Kong, United States, Korea, Germany, andJapan. Indonesia will experience an economic recession if economic growth in the thirdquarter is also negative.The Indonesian economy based on Gross Domestic Product (GDP) based on currentprices in the first quarter of 2022 reached Rp4,513.0 trillion and at constant prices in2010 reached Rp2,818.6 trillion. Also, Indonesia’s economy in the first quarter of 2022compared to the first quarter of 2021 grew by 5.01 percent (y-on-y). In terms of pro-duction, the Transportation and Warehousing Business Field experienced the highestgrowth of 15.79 percent. Meanwhile, in terms of expenditure, the Export Component ofProducts and Services experienced the highest growth of 16.22 percent (BPS, 2022).This positive growth is of course due to after post Covid-19 pandemic, but on the otherhand, seeing that during Covid-19 pandemic has caused changes in people’s habits thattend to make transactions or buying and selling online, this will also have an impact inthe future. Thus, this will certainly have an impact on the existence of the Indonesianeconomy post Covid-19 pandemic. The trend of shopping through e-commerce basedDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 26INCLARabroad is increasingly easy to find in other parts of the world, especially post Covid-19pandemic has almost hit all countries, even Indonesia nowtodays.Nowdays, we can see together that consumers from Indonesia can get products fromanywhere, for example, from Australia cheaply through existing online stores. The lowprice was obtained because the products from overseas e-commerce were not subjectto import duties. If this continues, it can disrupt the domestic business climate. Mainly,Indonesian small-medium entrepreneurs (“MSMEs”) who also sell through e-commerceplatforms [6]. This is one of the effects of technological advances that are growingrapidly in the world market in all parts of the world. As a result of these developments,it creates an instant habit of getting an item using only online shopping applications.Therefore, all business people who are located in any country. Indonesia as one ofthe countries that has a large population is a destination for these business actors,even though the policies that have been carried out by the government are pro to thedomestic economy, the steps taken by a number of e-commerce companies to closeaccess to cross-border trade is considered inadequate. More trade in imported productsoccurs after the product is generally imported by business actors, then resold online[7]. This behavior is certainly not beneficial at all for the small economy in Indonesia.Illegal foreign products that are very cheap and not necessarily genuine can threatenlocal products in Indonesia. The potential for state losses is also very large due to illegalcross-border practices because no taxes are paid [8]. The government, the formulationof a cross-border e-commerce transaction taxation scheme is more complex than thatapplied to local actors [9]. This is certainly a critical problem that needs to be resolvedimmediately with policies that favor local domestic business actors, especially in post-Covid-19 pandemic for Indonesia’s economic recovery post Covid-19 pandemic.If we look at the consequences of this, the big impact is experienced especially byMSMEs, so the role of government policies to increase the role of MSMEs in the country’seconomy needs to be followed up with legal protection using the green economyconcept. This is related to efforts and to move the real sector, so that MSMEs get legalcertainty. The role of a small economy can be increased if the map of the problems itexperiences can be identified and then assisted with a comprehensive countermeasureprogram so that its growth can be felt by the lowest community, especially the MSMEscommunity [10].The importance of maintaining a sustainable economic climate for the welfare of theIndonesian people, both for the current generation and the next generation, economicactivities that produce products and create jobs. Thus, green economy concept isneeded in order to support the welfare and justice of domestic market players to beDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 27INCLARgiven the opportunity to develop the Indonesian economy. We agree and hope that thevision of national market development in the future must be based on green economyregulations, to maintain a balance between improving people’s welfare and maintainingthe national economy. Therefore, there is great hope that in micro and macro-economicdevelopment carried out by the government, the government has adopted the principlesof the green economy in its implementation in the field.There are 5 principles of green economy-based economic development. The first, agreen economy must be able to create prosperity for all mankind. Second, it must beable to create equality, both in one generation period and with the next generation.Third, must be able to maintain, restore, and invest in various activities based on naturalresources. Fourth, it is expected to be able to support sustainable levels of consumptionand production. Fifth, it must be supported by strong, integrated, and accountableinstitutions [11].Thus the urgency in overcoming the problems that exist in the era ofcross-border e-commerce needs to be done immediately by the government. Therefore,in this matter, the authors provide suggestions for optimizing solutions to the partiesconcerned while still paying attention to and prioritizing the concept of a green economywith family economic principles and fair and correct supervision in create regulationsregarding cross-border e-commerce and its impact on the economy in Indonesia. Basedon the explanation of the problems above, the researchers here draw two problemformulations as follows: 1) What does it look like, conditions and challenges in Indonesia’seconomic recovery in the midst of increasing cross-border e-commerce trade post theCovid-19 pandemic, 2) How to optimize the concept of green economy policy as asolution in facing the challenges of economic recovery in the midst of increasing cross-border e-commerce trade in post Covid-19 pandemic.2. METHODOLOGY/ MATERIALSThis paper uses normative law research, which is a legal research conducted by exam-ining library materials or secondary data. Normative legal research is also known asdoctrinal legal research. According to Peter Mahmud Marzuki, normative legal researchis a process to find a rule of law, legal principles, and legal doctrines in order to answerthe legal issues faced. In this type of legal research, law is often conceptualized aswhat is written in legislation or the law is conceptualized as a rule or norm whichis a benchmark for human behavior that is considered appropriate. This paper usesnormative law research, which is a legal research conducted by examining librarymaterials or secondary data. Normative legal research is also known as doctrinal legalDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 28INCLARresearch. According to Peter Mahmud Marzuki, normative legal research is a process tofind a rule of law, legal principles, and legal doctrines in order to answer the legal issuesfaced. In this type of legal research, law is often conceptualized as what is written inlegislation or the law is conceptualized as a rule or normwhich is a benchmark for humanbehavior that is considered appropriate.[12] The data and information used to analyzethis paper emphasizes the use of literature sources and secondary data related to e-commerce and cross-border e-commerce trade, such as books, scientific journals, massmedia, and study documents from existing survey institutions. Based on the literaturereview and the results of previous studies, these are then compiled with deductive logicto discuss and analyze the potential, the role of the government and the challengesthat need to be overcome in optimizing the presence of e-commerce post Covid-19pandemic for the national economy.The data and information used to analyze this paper emphasizes the use of literaturesources and secondary data related to e-commerce and cross-border e-commercetrade, such as books, scientific journals, massmedia, and study documents from existingsurvey institutions. Based on the literature review and the results of previous studies,these are then compiled with deductive logic to discuss and analyze the potential, therole of the government and the challenges that need to be overcome in optimizing thepresence of e-commerce post Covid-19 pandemic for the national economy.3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS3.1. Conditions and Challenges in Indonesia's Economic inE-Commerce Cross-border Trade Post Covid-19 PandemicThe conditions and challenges for Indonesia’s economic recovery post Covid-19 actuallycannot be separated from technological advances which will have a considerableinfluence on the economic activities. The existing conditions and challenges are notonly due to the decline in market selling value due to Covid-19 pandemic, but also tothe increasing spread of cross-border e-commerce trade. This can happen becauseduring Covid-19 pandemic, social conditions of community did not allow for face-to-face trade meetings, so communication technology brought developments in trade intoonline trading and shoping. The Covid-19 pandemic has encouraged the growth of adigital trading and shoping ecosystem by utilizing technology ranging from processesto marketing products and services. The presence of e-commerce which has grownsignificantly, both domestic and non-domestic has become a place for MSMEs to marketDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 29INCLARtheir products, in other words, e-commerce is a solution for convenience and profitfor business activities by bargaining or exchanging products and services betweencompanies. Sellers and buyers without limited access, and quickly in obtaining a productas desired without having to leave the house [13].The digitalization era is not always seen as profitable. The current conditions inpractice tend to be detrimental to MSMEs with the emergence of cross-border e-commerce trade carried out by non-domestic e-commerce. There is no legal normthat regulates it, so it is clear that there is still weak legal certainty and protectiongiven to MSMEs from cross-border e-commerce trading practices. Cross-border e-commerce trade is one type of international e-commerce which is similar to cross-border e-tailing. This action that allows for splitting or splitting of transactions for thepurchase of products and services by cross-border e-commerce is what makes MSMEsvery disadvantaged and unfairly competed in the market.E-commerce is the fastest growing area in the global economy, which provides conve-nience between sellers and buyers. The convenience provided is in the form of distanceshortening because transactions are carried out online and can be accessed by variousregions or countries as long as they have adequate technology and information andcommunication (ICT) [14]. Consciously, at this time economic developments, especiallyin buying and selling activities, can be carried out between countries and are notconfined to a particular country, so that Indonesia, as an international community, isready or not ready, whether we like it or not, and like it or not, we must be able to followthe developments that are taking place.The business area should indeed be considered as a world that cannot stand alone, itcan be proven by the existence of a transaction that includes between business actorsand consumers. There are other aspects involved in the business or the economyarea. The existing linkages can provide a separate limitation with the business area,for example, a regulation that must be obeyed by business actors and consumers. Theimpact of Covid-19 pandemic has forced the flow of movement from the economy tobe hampered but has changed the way of thinking of business people to be able tocontinue living by developing good marketing and sales strategies. Thus, the economyin Indonesia is increasingly leading to an economy that is independent and with integrity.However, this rapid change brings a high competitiveness and forces business actorsto be able to keep abreast of existing developments, even though to form a rule orregulation regarding these changes it takes quite a long time, due to the need for aprocess and going through various discussions and considerations. The existing com-petitiveness can be considered as an important challenge for the economic system inDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 30INCLARIndonesia, especially during the recovery period post Covid-19 pandemic. Therefore, thesolution to the conditions and challenges for the recovery of the Indonesian economypost Covid-19 pandemic which is also influenced by the increase in cross-border e-commerce trade must be related to the status of the Indonesian state, namely a stateof law. The conditions and challenges that are clearly faced are the lack of formation ofrules, both the formation of laws regarding cross-border trade or extraterritorial borders,regulations regarding taxation which are sometimes still overlooked by the presenceof illegal products that escape supervision, as well as agreements between countriesin the world regarding what matters may and may not be done when cross-bordere-commerce online trade occurs.Indonesia has not yet established a special law regarding cross-border trade in thescope of cross-border e-commerce, the current rule for cross-border trade is Gov-ernment Regulation (PP) Number 80 of 2009 concerning Trading Through ElectronicSystems (ITE), while further provisions will only be regulated in a PP which until nowstill needs to be pushed for completion. In addition, the requirement for conductingcross-border trade is still fixed on export-import requirements and must comply with theITE Law. In fact, seeing this very rapid progress, e-commerce trading must have its ownlegal basis that is stronger and regulates all loopholes in the occurrence of fraud in thetrading system.The application of rules that must be stricter and supervision that must be moreguarded against cross-border trade is caused because not only through face-to-facedelivery of products or must first be verified on products that will enter or leaveIndonesia, but these products can be easily ordered to enter and exit, it can be difficultto detect possible fraud. It is undeniable that technological progress has a bad side init, so strict supervision and rules can be one way to close the fraud. Letter, this will berelated to the imposition of taxable products (BKP) which can provide benefits to thestate. According to Gustav Radbuch, the purpose and function of Law should consist ofthree very important things, namely the existence of the principle of legal certainty froma juridical point of view, the principle of legal justice from a philosophical point of view,and the principle of legal expediency. Thus, as a State of Law that must understand thepurpose of the Law well, Indonesia must be able to form rules regarding cross-bordere-commerce trade quickly.In addition, the placement of the execution of decisions in Indonesia is still territorial,making it difficult to implement a court decision that only applies to the territory ofIndonesia. Execution for regions outside Indonesia or abroad is difficult or even impos-sible given the absence of applicable rules, even though the handling of executions,DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 31INCLARespecially in cases of trade during the cross-border e-commerce period, is very impor-tant in order to bring order to foreign business actors who act submissively and play onthe existing rules.The absence of international cooperation on trade law that leads to business com-petition in the cross-border e-commerce gives the impression that each country stilldisobeys the rule of law of the international community and does not rely on the lawin its mechanism. Therefore, cooperation between countries is needed to form a morelaw-abiding business competition authority both bilaterally and multilaterally, this is notonly beneficial for Indonesia but also for other countries, considering that legal certaintycan help business actors who are groaning as well as business actors who maintain thestability of their business.The development of cross-border e-commerce trade poses new challenges from thetaxation aspect. The current international tax system is seen as incompatible with thedigital transaction business model. Countries in the world are nowdays faced with twochoices in cross-border e-commerce trading, namely unilaterally regulating themselvesin domestic rules or making mutual agreements between countries in the world [15].The Indonesian government has carried out and made regulations on taxation oftransactions based on cross-border e-commerce trade through PMK 210/PMK.10/2018,but these regulations still cause a lot of conflict in the community, especially amongcross-border e-commerce traders.Another challenge, matters relating to business competition law enforcement in thecross-border e-commerce sector in Indonesia is related to the potential for monopolisticpractices and unfair business competition in the e-commerce sector such as digitalmonopoly, digital predatory, lock-in and others. Another challenge is related to the factthat the principle of extraterritoriality has not been adopted in Law Number 5 of 1999concerning the Prohibition of Monopolistic Practices and Unfair Business Competition.In relation to these issues, the Business Competition Supervisory Commission (KPPU)itself has a supervisory role and has the authority to act as investigators, investigators,examiners, prosecutors, decision makers, as well as consultative functions in the contextof enforcing business competition law in the e-commerce [16].However, the function as a supervisor for unfair business competition is still pilingup in the country. The absence of agreements between countries or multilateral andbilateral in enforcing business competition law in extraterritorial form is also one of themajor obstacles to the development of rules between countries. Therefore, KPPU itself ishampered in processing reports regarding the problem of unfair business competition,although basically KPPU must move to find evidence. Based on this discussion, theDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 32INCLARauthors believe that the conditions and challenges of economic recovery in Indonesiapost Covid-19 pandemic will be even more difficult, because they not only have tostruggle to develop the economy from within the country, but also immediately forcedto be ready to compete with free trade between countries that even there are no regu-lations or strict supervision in Indonesia. Therefore, as a country that has diverse naturalresources, Indonesia must be able to take advantage of existing natural resources to beable to pump up the nation’s economic downturn without forgetting to protect naturalwealth which will be passed down to the next generation. The condition of existingnatural wealth can make the nation’s economy increasingly peak. Besides that, cross-border trade is used as a forum to introduce Indonesian culture to foreign countries, withthe ease of technology to market and sell products on e-commerce media, it should beable to open up opportunities for Indonesia’s cultural wealth to be more visible in theeyes of the world. Therefore, the existing conditions and challenges can be overcomeby incising a good color in it.3.2. Green Economic as Law Concept in Economic RecoveryPost Covid-19 in the Middle of Increasing Cross-border E-CommerceReflecting on the existence of Article 33 paragraph 4 of the 1945 Constitution of theRepublic of Indonesia (UUD 1945) which reads:”The national economy is organized based on economic democracy with the princi-ples of togetherness, efficiency, justice, sustainability, environmental insight, indepen-dence, and by maintaining a balance of progress and national economic unity”.It makes us aware that the nation’s economy must be properly structured basedon existing principles. So, the national economic policy must pay attention to severalprinciples that have been explained in Article 33 paragraph 4 of the 1945 Constitution.The government as the owner of power should provide welfare, justice and economicbalance, this is certainly one of the government’s obligations to carry out what ismandated by the 1945 Constitution as the basis for state guidelines. Indonesia hasabundant in natural resources, makes Indonesia a country that is seen in its economy.This should be maintained by continuing to strive for economic development in varioussectors while still paying attention to the concept of sustainable development, whichis a development that is based on the principle of meeting the needs of the presentwithout compromising the fulfillment of the needs of future generations.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 33INCLARIn connection with the above objectives, a green economy concept can be partto answer the prablems. The concept of green economy was first introduced at theUnited Nations (UN) Conference in 1992, also known as the Rio Summit [17]. Thisinitiative then began to be realized after the global financial crisis in 2008, when theinternational community tried to revive the economy in a more sustainable way. TheUnitedNations Environment Program (UNEP) formulated a definition of a green economyconcept that is generally accepted as an economy that results in increased humanand social well-being, and significantly reduces the risk of environmental damage.In other words, the application of a green economy can change economic practicesthat emphasize short-term profits into an environmentally friendly economy. However,there are some differences in views between developing countries and developedcountries regarding the concept of a green economy. The basic difference refers to theresponsibilities and capabilities. Therefore, the definition of a green economy impliesflexibility and also depends on the differences seen based on different economic, social,and environmental factors in each country. The general principles used in the greeneconomy include [18]:1. Green economy is a means to achieve sustainable development;2. Green economy improves governance and rule of law, inclusive, democratic, par-ticipatory, accountable, transparent, and stable.Democracy in the economic field provides equal opportunities for every businessactor to participate actively in the process of producing and marketing products and/orservices in an effective, healthy, and efficient business climate so as to encourageeconomic growth. Green economy is a relatively new concept which is actually a con-tinuation of sustainable development. This concept is very popularly used by countriesthat are members of the European Union (EU) as a sustainability measure contained inthe Treaty of the Functioning European Union (TFEU) and the European Union Charteron Fundamental Rights of the European Union. The form of implementation greeneconomy is the establishment of trade agreements, both multilateral and bilateral whichhave a sustainable development orientation.The development of the digital trade ecosystem by utilizing technology, ranging fromprocesses to marketing products and services, e-commerce which is growing rapidlyand significantly both at the domestic and non-domestic levels has become one of theforums for MSMEs to market their products and services. In other words, e-commerce isa solution for convenience and profit for business activities by bargaining or exchangingproducts and services between sellers and buyers without limited access, as well asDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 34INCLARbeing fast in obtaining a product as desired without having to leave the house [13].In addition, the factors driving the rapid growth of e-commerce is divided into twopossibilities, namely the existence of competitive incentives and costs. Indirectly, e-commerce has become a field for new business models in various countries that helpnational economic growth. This situation can be seen clearly based on data on theprojected value of the Indonesian digital economy sector, which shows a significantincrease every year. Further development of the entry of the digitalization era is notalways seen as always profitable. The problem in question is marked by the emergenceof cross-border e-commerce trading practices. Cross-border e-commerce trade is onetype of international e-commerce which is similar to cross-border e-tailing. Actions thatallow for splitting or splitting of products purchase transactions make the state sufferlosses. Therefore, in this case a form of legal concretization is needed for the realizationof a principle of certainty and community welfare which is in line with the goals of thegreen economy as a sustainable economic development.So far, sustainable development in the economic field with the concept of a greeneconomy is only always associated with developments related to environmental insight,we forget that the goal of the green economy itself has the ultimate goal of welfareand justice that can be felt by the community. Therefore, in this case, we believe thatgreen economy concept can also be implemented in policies related to cross-bordere-commerce. Thus, policies in cross-border e-commerce needs to be aligned withgreen growth policies, which are to ensure that green economy policies contribute toIndonesia’s national and regional strategic goals. In ensuring these policies, systematicrules are needed and will pave the way in contributing to the successful achievementof the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) [19]. It is important for us to understandliteracy that current economic developments propagate to the e-commerce sectors.Indonesia as one of the countries that is being targeted by business actors becauseof its large population, and the presence of significant e-commerce, it is necessary toimmediately has regulations that adapt to the concept of a green economy. AlthoughIndonesia has regulated regulations relating to the empowerment of local MSMEs inthe Minister of Finance Regulation (Permenkeu) No. 199/PMK/010/2019 which lowersthe import duty threshold from US$ 75 to US$ 3 and protection for local Cooperativesand MSMEs through Government Regulation (PP) Number 7 of 2021 concerning Ease,Protection, and Empowerment of Cooperatives and MSMEs and the Law No. 11 of2020 concerning Job Creation [20]. However, this still does not specifically regulatecross-border e-commerce. The descriptions of the problems above certainly cannotbe realized if only depend on the government, so therefore the authors would like toDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 35INCLARprovide several recommendations in achieving the goals of the green economy concept,namely:1. Green in AllThe support of all parties such as the community, business actors, and the govern-ment have a strategic role to improve the economic and social welfare of the community,ensure inclusive development, and maintain the quality of the community in onlineshopping by optimizing socialization and invitations to shop for domestic productswhich are important points in developing domestic economy [21]. In carrying out thisinvitation, we can do it easily through the use of existing social media, such as Facebook,Instagram, Twitter, Tiktok, and so on, of course there must be awareness and concernfrom each individual, and to build this awareness there needs to be work the samebetween the parties involved. If we see other countries began to influence to love theirproducts openly with the cultures they have. For example, they influence through theentertainment sector, such as South Korea, which indirectly invites our people to lovetheir products through their entertainment sector. In this case, the subject is our youngpeople, where they are more productive in utilizing e-commerce shopping. Therefore,responding to these challenges, all existing parties, the private sector, individuals,groups, and the government must also participate in minimizing these threats, by raisingawareness through institutions, both formal and non-formal.2. Green GovernmentThe role of the government in designing and educating the public to care aboutdomestic products is to be at the forefront to always promote in every activity byused good strategic. The government, both central and regional, must work togetherin embracing all communities in various regions, because the existence of unstoppablee-commerce that can be accessed anywhere and anytime can easily affect people fromvarious circles, from the young to the old though. The central government which has avery strategic role in this issue, such as the ministry of finance, the business competitionsupervisory commission (KPPU), the ministry of trade, the ministry of communicationand so on. For example, the participation of the ministry of finance in supporting thisby optimizing taxes for business actors who sell domestically through e-commerceplatforms. This has to be seen from several sides, the tax rate must depend on a country,for example, products originating from Singapore and Thailand, should be applieddifferently, which takes into account the exchange rate between the two countries andthe graphic condition and value of the product being sold, and establish cooperation,especially in the field of taxation in the field of e-commerce.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 36INCLARIf a technical point of view, business competition law is traditionally known from twodifferent perspectives, namely Business Competition Law being a ”Shield” and businesscompetition law being a ”Sword.” The application of business competition law can beused as a “sword” to achieve sustainability, which can be achieved by prohibiting actionsthat deviate from the perspective of sustainability. Meanwhile, business competition lawas far as the supporting aspect as a ”shield” allows actions that are directed to achievesustainability in balancing the effects of healthy sustainability for the domestic economy[22].A clear description of Business Competition Law as a “Sword” is reviewed basedon the application of Article 101 paragraph 3 of The Treaty on the Functioning of theEuropean Union (TFEU).The application of Article 101 paragraph 3 of the TFEU wasreflected in the case of automakers in Germany, where the European Commissionimposed a fine of EUR 875,189,000 on BMW and the Volkswagen group (Audi andPorche) for violating EU antitrust rules in particular Article 101 paragraph 1 of the TFEU bycolluding on developments in the area of nitrogen oxide cleaning [23]. In addition, it canalso be seen in the detergent case involving Henkel, Unilever and Procter and Gambleengaging in market stabilizing behavior by not using environmental initiatives to gain acompetitive advantage over others. This case review describes the implementation ofa green economy in business competition law in European Union (EU) is successful. Itis possible that we will also achieve success by embracing, trusting and working hardtogether in combating unhealthy economic threats so as to provide economic prosperityto the domestic community.3. Green RegulationHealthy economic protection in the field of e-commerce also needs to be legal-ized through regulations or laws. Protecting a healthy economy through regulationsis deemed necessary because it is the goal, guideline, and measuring instrumentfor the life of the nation. Even though Indonesia has made amendments to the 1945Constitution, not many parties have taken this matter seriously. Article 33 paragraph(4) of the 1945 Constitution is proof that the Indonesian constitution can be calledthe Green Constitution. Article 33 paragraph (4) of the 1945 Constitution, the idea ofgreen regulation is that the sovereignty of a healthy economy is a complement to theexisting treasures of sovereignty theory. In history, mankind has known the idea ofGod’s Sovereignty which is associated with theocracy, the idea of people’s sovereigntywhich is associated with democracy.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 37INCLARThus maintaining the country’s economy is the government’s duty in carrying out theconstitutional mandate, considering the laws that specifically regulate online trade hasnot been regulated and we see that the world is now easily accessible anywhere, hencethe urgency in the formation of laws to protect various parties, partiality and support fordomestic business actors for the progress and civility of the country in order to welcomeadvanced Indonesia in 2030.4. Green E-commerceE-commerces is one form of progress that emerged from the rapid development ofthe internet and became a trend in the world for the last ten years. In Indonesia, the useof online shopping sites and online store transactions tends to increase even though theinfrastructure and regulations are still lagging. This is a great opportunity and requiresa comprehensive policy in order to be able to develop and utilize economic digitiza-tion activities optimally. E-commerce practices are able to increase economic growthbecause they can save transaction costs, eliminate space and time constraints, reduceshipping costs, minimize transportation barriers, facilitate communication between sell-ers and buyers, and reduce advertising and transportation costs. On the other hand,The government plays an important role in implementing six strategies to be ableto encourage the practice of the digital economy, namely knowledge development,knowledge dissemination, subsidies, mobilization, innovation direction, and standardsetting. Meanwhile, the challenges in developing e-commerce activities are consumersecurity and protection, logistics and infrastructure, and taxation related to e-commercetransactions [24].Indonesian government and industry e-commercehas have been going quite wellin partnership efforts to advance the digital economy in Indonesia. The positive valueis the joining of Indonesia in the ASEAN Agreement on E-Commerce, for example,where we can synergize more with e-commerce stakeholders in all ASEAN membercountries [25]. Realizing the importance of the green economy concept, especially inthe e-commerce sector, its implementation must be supported by government policies.In this regard, for the realization of good implementation, a government supervisoryand control institution is needed. There is government involvement in the direction ofgreen e-commerce which is properly designed and implemented effectively. So, thegreen economy can become an instrument in green e-commerce specifically to restorethe economy in a sustainable and inclusive manner.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 38INCLAR4. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONBased on the research above, the authors would like to conclude the results of thisstudy. The existence of technological advances must be used very well by all aspectsof the subject of the state, the conditions of technological progress that affect the tradingsystem which is usually carried out face-to-face have turned out to be easier, namelythrough onlinemedia which is not only in Indonesia but also can shop outside Indonesia,for example, shopping malls such as Shopee, Bli-Bli, Tokopedia, and other onlineshopping platforms. Seeing this phenomenon, actually developments in Indonesia mustalso be able to follow the existing progress. However, as a state of law, it is unfortunatethat the movement to establish legal rules regarding cross-border trade or regulationsregarding extraterritorial trade in Indonesia still does not have a clear legal basis. In fact,the existence of a legal basis that will become the pathway for the course of cross-bordertrade is very important, an example of a violation that becomes one of themain problemsis the ease with which illegal products enter the country without being taxed. In othercases, there is a violation of the crossing of territorial lines on merchant ships, then theformation of rules firm and strict supervision is the beginning of the orderly participationof the Indonesian state to improve the economy by plunging into world trade not onlythrough the import-export system. Moreover, trading activities are closely related tomonopolistic and unfair competition, so it is necessary to form binding agreementsboth within Indonesia and even by international countries to prevent any acts of abuseof international trade progress. things like this of course bring losses to the Indonesianstate, or in other cases, there is a violation regarding the crossing of territorial lineson merchant ships, then the establishment of strict rules and strict supervision is thebeginning of the orderly participation of the Indonesian state to improve the economyby plunging into world trade not only through the import-export system. In achievingthis goal, it is not only the role of the government but also necessary steps such as theestablishment of green regulation, green government, and green e-commerce, In orderto achieve the ideal goal of economic recovery in the midst of cross-border e-commercepractices, several things that need to be considered in supporting, there are:1. (a) Aware that Indonesia is a country of law and there is a legal vacuum regardingcross-border trade, we suggest 3 important things in order to balance thedevelopment of cross-border e-commerce so that it can be put to good usefor post-Covid-19 economic recovery, namely:DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 39INCLAR2. Establish a legal umbrella regarding extraterritorial provisions in cross-border tradethat can benefit domestic MSMEs and also support MSMEs participation in cross-border trade as a form of encouragement in Indonesia’s economic recovery.3. Establishing an Indonesian-owned online trading platform that contains notonly fashion items but also natural resources (vegetables, fruit, or even naturalresources) within the country so that they can be sent abroad and increasinglyrecognized by the world.4. Forming international agreements with other countries to be able to balancedomestic regulations, established international regulations regarding prohibitions,penalties, and also what must be obeyed in cross-border trade.(a) A legal umbrella regarding extraterritorial provisions in cross-bordere-commerce, it is also necessary to have this arrangement oriented towardsa green economy. There are at least 5 (five) recommendations accordingto the authors that can frame economic recovery in the midst of cross-border e-commerce practices, namely the establishment of green in all,green regulation, green government, green e-commerce, and the need forsupervisory agencies in carrying out control functions by the government.References[1] Komite Pemantau Pelaksanaan Otonomi Daerah. “Laju Pemulihan Ekonomi DaerahSetelah Covid-19 Diprediksi Tak Serempak,” www.kppod.org, 2021.[2] Modjo MI. Memetakan Jalan Penguatan Ekonomi Pasca Pandemi. Indones. J. Dev.Plan. 2020;IV(2).[3] Fika NU. “BI Prediksi Transaksi E-Commerce Melonjak Sampai Rp 429 TriliunSepanjang Tahun 2020,” Kompas.com, 2020.[4] Wibowo H. Kerugian Ekonomi Nasional Akibat Pandemi Covid-19. J. Bus. Entrep.2020;2(2).[5] Dewi W. Dampak Pandemi Covid-19 Terhadap Pertumbuhan Ekonomi Indonesia2020 Dan Solusinya. Volume 1. Info Singk; 2020.[6] Pajakku, “Pajak Bea Masuk Transaksi e-Commerce Lintas Negara Segera Berlaku,Begini Cara Membayarnya,” www.pajakku.com, 2019.[7] Fathimah T. “Penutupan Keran Perdagangan Cross Border E-Commerce TidakEfektif,” ekonomi.bisnis.com, 2021.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 40INCLAR[8] Ratih W. “Banjir praktik cross-border ilegal di platform e-commerce, ini katapemerintah,” industri.kontan.co.id, 2021.[9] Bisnis.com. “Pemerintah Siapkan Konsep Pemajakan untuk E-Commerce CrossBorder,” www.ssas.co.id, 2019.[10] Astuti M, Matondang N, Amanda AR. “Peningkatan UKM Pakaian Jadi diDKI Jakarta,” LPPM STIE Muhammadiyah Bandung, vol. 2, no. 3, 2018.https://doi.org/10.31955/mea.vol2.iss3.pp37-67.[11] Fauzi A. Ekonomi Sumber Daya Alam dan Lingkungan. Jakarta: PT Gramedia PustakaUtama; 2004.[12] Fitriana ZM, Maeyangsari D, Wahyudi E. Implementasi Prinsip Partisipatif dalamPengelolaan Keuangan Desa(Studi Kasus di Desa Jabung, KabupatenLamongan).J. Dedik. Huk. 2021;3(1).[13] Anjani MR, Santoso B. Urgensi Rekonstruksi Hukum E-Commerce Di Indonesia. J.Law Reform. 2018;14(1).[14] 14 F. Ding F, Huo J. “Pengembangan E-commerce Lintas Batas.” 2019.[15] Kurniawa AM. “Pemajakan Perdagangan Melalui Sistem Elektronik (PMSE) LintasNegara (Unilateral Measure VsGlobal Consensus),” in National Simposium of FinacialStat, 2020, p. 315.[16] Hayati AN. Analisis Tantangan Dan Penegakan Hukum Persaingan Usaha PadaSektor E-Commerce Di Indonesia (Analysis of Challenges and Law Enforcementof Business Competition in The E- Commerce Sector in Indonesia). J. Penelit. Huk.Jure. 2021;21(1).[17] [17] D’amato D, Droste N, Winkler K, Toppinen A. “Thinking green, circular or bio:Eliciting research perspective on a sustainable economy with Q method,” J. Clean.Prod. 2019;230(460–476). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.05.099..[18] UNEP. “Briefing Green Economy,” www.unep.org, 2020.[19] Global Green Growth Institute. Pengerustamaan Pertumbuhan Ekonomi Hijau dalamPerencanaan. Jakarta; 2015.[20] Kemenkom UK. “Satu Lagi Marketplace Tutup Akses Produk Cross Border, PotensiUMKM Makin Besar Kuasai Pasar,” smesco.go.id, 2021.[21] Kementerian KR. Ekonomi Hijau untuk Masa Depan Peradaban. Maj. Media Keuang.2021;XIV(167):12.[22] Malinauskaite J. “Competition Law and Sustainability: EU and National Perspectives,”J. Eur. Compet. Law Pract., 2022. https://doi.org/10.1093/jeclap/lpac003.[23] European Commission, “Competition Policy Supporting the green deal,” 2013.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 41INCLAR[24] Bahtiar RA. Potensi, Peran Pemerintah, Dan Tantangan Dalam Pengembangan E-Commerce Di Indonesia. J. Ekon. Kebijak. Publik. 2020;11(1).[25] Bisnis Indonesia, “Menguji Taji E-commerce Indonesia di Pasar ASEAN,” bisnisin-donesia.id, 2021.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12072 Page 42