Empirical Study to Evaluate the Economic Resilience of Agricultural Household with Adjusted Living Standard Index (ALSI) Approached (Case Study for Victims of Merapi’s Eruption 2012

10 
 
Empirical Study to Evaluate the Economic Resilience of Agricultural 
Household with Adjusted Living Standard Index (ALSI) Approached (Case 
Study for Victims of Merapi’s Eruption 2012) 
 
Muhamad Fathul Muin1 
1 Badan Pusat Statistik Provinsi Papua, Jayapura 99112, Indonesia 
Email : *muhamad.fathul.muin@gmail.com 
 
Dikirim : 5 April 2019 
Diterima: 19 Mei 2019 
 
Abstrak: Bencana dapat menyebabkan perekonomian hancur, terutama sektor pertanian di empat 
kabupaten: Magelang, Sleman, Klaten, dan Boyolali. Untuk mengevaluasi kondisi ekonomi korban 
bukanlah sesuatu hal yang mudah, sehingga memerlukan pendekatan alternatif. Oleh karena itu, tujuan 
dari makalah ini adalah mengevaluasi ketahanan ekonomi korban menggunakan indeks komposit, uji-t, 
uji berpasangan, dan ANOVA unbalanced. Penelitian ini berhasil membangun indikator yang disebut 
The Adjusted Living Standard Index (ALSI) untuk pendekatan standar hidup. Dimensi yang digunakan 
terdiri atas pendapatan, transfer sosial, aset non produktif, dan aset produktif. Studi ini juga menemukan 
bahwa standar hidup para korban sebelum erupsi di seluruh daerah tergolong rendah. Namun pasca 
bencana menyebabkan dimensi standar kehidupan mengalami penurunan secara signifikan, kecuali 
transfer sosial. Disisi lain, setelah dua puluh dua bulan masyarakat mengalami pemulihan. Hanya saja 
uji statistik menunjukkan bahwa banyak perbedaan dalam ketahanan ekonomi yang disebabkan oleh 
komponen transfer sosial. Sehingga untuk membuat masyarakat lebih resilience, diperlukan kebijakan 
yang mendukung serta penyediaan asuransi. 
 
Kata kunci: pendekatan alternatif, indeks komposit, ekonomi rumah tangga, bencana alam, bencana 
gunung api. 
 
Abstract: Disaster made the economic gotten destroyed, especially for the agricultural sector in four 
regencies: Magelang, Sleman, Klaten, and Boyolali. To evaluate the economics of victim’s society isn’t 
easy and need the alternative approached. So the aim of this paper to evaluate them use the composite 
index, t-test, t paired test, and unbalanced ANOVA. This research success to construct a new tool named 
The Adjusted Living Standard Index (ALSI) to approach the living standard. The dimension used 
consisted of income, social transfer, nonproductive assets, and productive assets. This study also 
founded that living standard of victims pra eruption all of the regions is low. The disaster tragedy made 
the dimensions of living standard fall down significantly, except for social transfer. However, after 
twenty-two months they have the recovery as well. But, the statistical tests showed that most of them 
have the difference in economic resilience caused by social transfer component. To make them more 
resilience, they need to strengthen supporting policy and insurance.  
 
Keywords: alternative approached, composite index, household economic, natural hazard, volcanic 
disaster. 
  
Introduction 
 
Disaster is a natural hazard which a negative effect for economic (Hallegatte, 2014). It made 
decrease for production, investment, consumption, income and job opportunity (Hallegatte, 
2014). Generally, the impact is greater than the society-environment ability and it makes the 
economic system can’t solve it. In this situation, the economic system suffered the cost (Silbert, 
2011) and the society loss the welfare (Hallegatte, 2015). In the case of 2010 Merapi’s eruption, 
this calamity gives the impact to economic performance, especially who lives in four Regency: 
JPIG (Jurnal Pendidikan dan Ilmu Geografi) 
Vol. 4, No. 2, September 2019 
Halaman: 10-17 
Online: http://ejournal.unikama.ac.id/index.php/JPIG/  
11 
 
Magelang, Sleman, Klaten, and Boyolali. Based on BNPB – UNDP’s report (2013), most of 
the sectors get the negative impact caused by Merapi eruption, especially the agricultural sector. 
One famous concept studying about the recovery from disaster is resilience, which defined as 
ability/capability from the household to prevent the potential loss (Rose, 2009), managed the 
change and maintain the ability to keep the living standard (Dinh & Pearson, 2015). Normally, 
to evaluate a region for recovery, most of the researcher use GDP as the indicator. But the 
resilience actually is a complicated concept (Lisnyak, 2015), so the GDP can’t use to describe 
it clearly (Stiglitz, Sen, & Fitoussi, 2009). The alternative indicator offered in this paper is using 
adjusted living standard. More than it, there is no research yet specialized for the agricultural 
household. Even though, the agricultural household is very important to be researched, because 
most of the populations stayed around Merapi have a job in the agricultural sector and mostly 
more vulnerable to face every shock (Harvey, et al., 2014). 
 
Materials and Methods 
 
The scope in this research is agricultural household which the victims of 2010 Merapi’s 
eruption, include four regencies. They have stayed at Magelang, Boyolali, Klaten, and Sleman. 
The population analyzed is agriculture household which all of the household members worked 
in the agricultural sector. This treatment based on arguments that they would more vulnerable 
than the partial member worked in the agricultural sector (Kahan, 2008). The data used sourced 
from the Survey Meter, corporate with UNDP and BNPB which done from September to 
October 2012. 
Infer to Kendal’s, et. al (2009), the household economic resilience can be approached by the 
ability to keep the living standard. So in this study, there are four indicators to approximate 
economic resilience. They are: 
a. Income, as a general indicator to evaluate the welfare (Hallegatte, 2014). 
b. Social transfer, the important instrument to increase the household ability and keep 
the livelihood when a disaster occurs (Kilburn & Handa, 2015). Moreover, the social 
transfer can improve the welfare by stimulating the production and anticipate the 
inequality (Künnemann & Leonhard, 2008). 
c. Nonproductive assets, as a saving instrument used to accelerate the consumption 
when needed (Morrone, Scrivens, Smith, & Balestra, 2011). 
d. Productive assets, as a net present value to protect from the risk, which it gives the 
contribution to keep the income and guarantee the economic in future (Morrone, 
Scrivens, Smith, & Balestra, 2011).  
All of the indicators used to construct the composite index which called Adjusted Living 
Standard Index (ALSI). Based on OECD (2008), Mazziato & Pareto (2013) dan USAID (2014), 
there are six steps to construct the composite index, include: 
a. build the theoretical framework 
b. choice the indicators 
c. data quality 
d. statistical analysis 
e. normalize data 
f. weighting and aggregation 
So, the formula used is ALSI = 
∑ Ii
4
i=1
4
  
I : indicator i-th (income, social transfer, nonproductive assets, productive assets). 
After that, the ALSI is classified to: 
a.          < 0.550 : living standard is low 
12 
 
b. 0.550 – 0.699 : living standard is medium 
c. 0.700 – 0.799 : living standard is high 
d.           > 0.800 : living standard is very high 
Furthermore, the statistical method used are t-test, t paired test, and unbalanced ANOVA. The 
t-test used to test the hypothesis that the ALSI is lower than 55. Then, the paired t-test useful 
to find there is no difference of ALSI between pre-eruption and after recovery. The last is 
unbalanced ANOVA used to statistical testing that no differences between the regency for ALSI 
and the dimension constructed it.  
 
Result  
 
Construct the Adjusted Living Standard Index (ALSI) 
 
Each indicator constructed from a number of variable which normalized by min-max method. 
To create the indicator from the variable we use the equal weighting approximation, except for 
income used the proportional median. This treatment also implemented to construct the ALSI 
from the indicator because we assumed that each indicator are equally important. 
 
Table 1: ALSI indicator constructed 
Indicator Variable Weight 
Income The average household member main income 0,2320 
The average household member another income 0,0180 
Social transfer The sum of social transfer include the money and food from 
government 
0,0625 
The sum of social transfer include the money and food from 
NGO 
0,0625 
The sum of social transfer include the money and food from 
blood family 
0,0625 
The sum of social transfer include the money and food from 
neighbor 
0,0625 
Nonproductive 
assets 
The sum of jewelries 0,0625 
The sum bicycle have 0,0625 
The sum motorcycle have 0,0625 
The sum of fowl have (nonbusiness purpose) 0,0625 
Productive assets 
 
 
  
The sum of land area 0,0625 
The sum of cattle 0,0625 
The sum of poultry 0,0625 
The total of nonagricultural business assets 0,0625 
 
Living Standard Pre Eruption 
 
The farm household show that income and social transfer in each district were low, which the 
pattern similar to the both of assets. Generally, based on figure 1. we can see that society depend 
highly with the social transfer (Koutsampelas, 2011) and confirmed that household economics 
in the farm sector are less prosperous. 
 
13 
 
Figure 1: ALSI per dimension 
 
The Household Economic Resilience 
 
After the volcanic explosion occurs at 2010 render every ALSI dimension decrease, except in 
the social transfer. The income decreased explain that the livelihood fell down and the farm 
household endures the loss. After twenty-two months, the three dimensions have recovered. 
For the income dimension case, it supported by the high power struggle in the farm household 
itself (Zedlewski, et al., 2003), appearing the new opportunity job like the volcano tour 
(Wijayanti), sand quarry (Habibullah, 2015), and the recovery of agricultural land. The 
dimension of assets be through the same thing, it explained that income and social transfers 
have a positive impact to boost the household repurchase the lost assets (Umeh & Asogwa, 
2012). 
 
14 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 2: Series of ALSI in each district 
 
Based on the explained before, we tested the hypothesis of economic resilience by ALSI 
differenced in two period time. Showed at table 2, t observation resulted greater than t table as 
generally. It concluded that statistically, the agricultural household in each regency have the 
resilience in economic. The interesting fact that household which low living standard doesn’t 
implicate for slowing recovery/low resilience (Austin, et al., 2004). It possible happen reasoned 
by social transfer received which substituted the loss of income and assets (Holmes & 
Bhuvanendra). 
 
15 
 
 
Table 2: The ALSI recovery / economic resilience 
 Boyolali Klaten Magelang Sleman 
Difference ALSI 1,75 18,29 -0,62 39,83 
t observation 1,693 2,796 -0,760 4,684 
t table 1,6683 1,7011 1,6570 1,6698 
 
Comparison The Economic Resilience Between The Regency 
 
Even though the households have recovered, the achievement in each region was different. 
Presented at table 3, it signifies that resilience is contrast for each regency, except between 
Magelang and Boyolali. Overall, the sequence of the greatest resilience is Sleman, Klaten, 
Magelang, and Boyolali. 
 
Table 3: Economic resilience difference testing 
Kabupaten 
Sig. 
Conclusion ANOVA 
Unbalanced* 
t test** 
Magelang – Boyolali 0,279 0,074 Not different 
Magelang – Klaten 0,037 0,008 Different 
Magelang – Sleman 0,000 0,000 Different 
Boyolali – Klaten 0,082 0,019 Different 
Boyolali – Sleman 0,000 0,000 Different 
Sleman – Klaten 0,193 0,048 Different 
* : significance on post hoc tests Gamess-Howell 
** : significance on t test with equal variances not assumed 
 
Table 4: ALSI’s constructed Indicator testing 
Dimension Sig. Conclusion 
Income 0,535 Not different 
Social transfer 0,000 Different 
Nonproductive assets 0.091 Not different 
Productive assets 0,077 Not different 
 
The disparity of resilience occur by the inequality on social transfer, but not for other 
dimensions. It terminated the pattern of economic resilience in each district are equal basically 
which induced by the similarity of the land resource utilized as an agricultural field. 
 
Conclusions 
 
This research found the farm household has a living standard lowly. But they have a great 
resilience economic to confront the shock of volcanic disaster. Nonetheless, the shape of ability 
between the regency is diverse just caused by social transfer. The further, we suggest to 
strengthening the policy to build them more adaptable with disaster and provide the supporting 
insurance to minimalize the economic cost borne. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
This paper has been extracted from author’s research report approved by Mrs. Retnaningsih 
and Mr. I Made Arcana from Institute of Statistics, Indonesia. 
 
 
16 
 
References 
Austin, M. J., Chow, J., Hastings, J., Taylor, S., Johnson, M., Lemon, K., & Leer, E. (2004). 
Serving Low-income Families in Poverty Neighborhoods Using Promising Programs 
and Practices: Building a Foundation for Redesigning Public and Nonprofit Social 
Services. Zellerbach Family Foundation and VanLobenSels/RembeRock Foundation. 
BNPB, & UNDP. (2013). Merapi: Pemulihan Penghidupan Warga Pasca Letusan Merapi 
2010, Laporan Studi Longitudinal.  
Dinh, H., & Pearson, L. (2015). Specifying Community Economic Resilience – A Framework 
for Measurement. Tthe 59th AARES Annual Conference (pp. 1-19). Rotorua: Australian 
Agricultural & Resource Economics Society. 
Habibullah, H. (2015). Dampak Erupsi Merapi terhadap Peningkatan Perekonomian 
Masyarakat: Studi Penambang Pasir dan Batu di Dusun Gunung Lemah Kelurahan 
Gondowangi Kecamatan Sawangan Kabupaten Magelang. Yogyakarta: Universitas 
Islam Negeri Sunan Kalijaga. 
Hallegatte, S. (2014). Natural Disasters and Climate Change. London: Springer. 
Hallegatte, S. (2015). The Indirect Cost of Natural Disasters and an Economic Definition of 
Macroeconomic Resilience. Public Finance and Macroeconomics, Paper 3, 1-35. 
Harvey, C. A., Rakotobe, Z. L., Rao, N. S., Dave, R., Razafimahatratra, H., Rabarijohn, R. H., 
. . . MacKinnon, J. L. (2014). Extreme vulnerability of smallholder farmers to 
agricultural risks and climate change in Madagascar. The Royal Society Publishing, 1-
12. 
Holmes, R., & Bhuvanendra, D. (n.d.). Social Protection and Resilient Food Systems, Summary 
1: The Role of Cash Transfers.  
Kahan, D. (2008). Farm Management Extension Guide: Managing Risk in Farming. Roma: 
FAO. 
Kilburn, K., & Handa, S. (2015). Malawi Social Cash Transfer Programme Impact Evaluation: 
Household Economics and Resilience at Baseline. UNC Carolina Population Center. 
Koutsampelas, C. (2011). Social Transfers and Income Distribution in Cyprus. Cyprus 
Economic Policy Review, 5(2), 35-55. 
Künnemann, R., & Leonhard, R. (2008). A Human Rights View of Social Cash Transfers for 
Achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Brot für die Welt dan Evangelischer 
Entwicklungsdienst. 
Lisnyak, S. (2015). Literature Review Regarding the Concept of Resilience and Its Assessment 
in the Context of the Economic Dimension. Centre for European Studies Working 
Paper, 7(2A), 511-518. 
Mazziato, M., & Pareto, A. (2013). Methods for Constructing Composite Indices: One for All 
or All for One. Rivista Italian di Economia Demografia e Statisticia, LXVII(2), 67. 
Morrone, A., Scrivens, K., Smith, C., & Balestra, C. (2011). Measuring Vulnerability and 
Resilience in OECD Countries. 7-8. 
17 
 
OECD. (2008). Handbook on Constructing Composite Indicators: Methodology and User 
Guide.  
Pendall, R., Foster, K. A., & Cowell, M. (2009, Maret). Resilience and Regions: Building 
Understanding of the Metaphor. Cambridge Journal of Regions Economy and Society, 
3(1), 71-84. 
Rose, A. Z. (2009). Defining and Measuring Economic Resilience to Earthquake. Earthquake 
Engineering Research Caners Program. 
Silbert, M. E. (2011). Small Island Economic Vulnerability to Natural Disasters (Disertasi ed.). 
Gainesville: University of Florida. 
Stiglitz, J. E., Sen, A., & Fitoussi, J.-P. (2009). The Measurement of Economic Performance 
and Social Progress Revisited: Reflections and Overview. Paris: Centre de recherche en 
économie de Sciences Po. 
Umeh, J. C., & Asogwa, B. C. (2012). Determinants of Farm Household Food Expenditure: 
Implications for Food Security in Rural Nigeria. International Conference on Ecology, 
Agriculture and Chemical Engineering (pp. 212-217). Phuket: Planetary Scientific 
Research Center. 
USAID. (2014). Design and Use of Composite Indices in Assessments of Climate Change 
Vulnerability and Resilience.  
Wijayanti, A. R. (n.d.). Dampak Bencana Gunung Api terhadap Perubahan Mata Pencaharian: 
Studi Kasus: Kawasan Wisata Volcano Tour Gunung Merapi, Desa Umbulharjo, 
Kecamatan Cangkringan, Kabupaten Sleman. Jurnal Perencanaan Wilayah dan Kota, 
89-96. 
Zedlewski, S. R., Nelson, S., Edin, K., Koball, H., Pomper, K., & Roberts, T. (2003). Families 
Coping without Earnings or Government Cash Assistance. Assessing the New 
Federalism, 1-45. 
 
 
