Extractive capitalism: Britain has been a high-inequality, high-poverty nation for most of the last 200 years, with significant consequences for life chances, social resilience, and economic strength

Extractive	capitalism:	Britain	has	been	a	high-inequality,	high-poverty	nation	for	most	of	the	last	200years,	with	significant	consequences	for	life	chances,social	resilience,	and	economic	strengthStewart	Lansley	writes	that	Britain’s	model	of	‘extractive	capitalism’	–	with	a	small	elite	securing	anexcessive	slice	of	the	economic	cake	–	has	created	a	two-century-long	high-inequality,	high-povertycycle,	one	broken	for	only	a	brief	period	after	the	Second	World	War.Over	the	last	four	decades,	Britain	has	moved	from	being	one	of	the	most	equal	of	rich	nations	to	thesecond	most	unequal	(after	the	United	States).	The	same	period	has	also	seen	a	surge	in	levels	ofpoverty,	with	the	child	poverty	rate	more	than	double	that	of	the	late	1970s	(figure	1).That	these	two	key	measures	of	social	fragility	have	moved	in	line	is	no	surprise.	History	cannot	be	clearer:	povertyand	inequality	are	critically	linked.	Poverty	occurs	when	sections	of	society	have	insufficient	resources	to	be	able	toafford	a	minimal	acceptable	contemporary	living	standard.	Its	scale	is	ultimately	determined	by	how	the	‘cake	is	cut’.Barring	the	short	post-war	period,	Britain	has	been	a	high-inequality,	high-poverty	nation	for	most	of	the	last	200years,	with	significant	consequences	for	life	chances,	social	resilience,	and	economic	strength.	Because	of	theimpact	of	inequality,	the	poorest	fifth	of	Britons	are	today	much	poorer	that	their	counterparts	in	other,	more	equalnations	(chart	2).	Germany’s	poorest,	for	example,	are	a	third	better	off	than	those	in	Britain.British Politics and Policy at LSE: Extractive capitalism: Britain has been a high-inequality, high-poverty nation for most of the last 200 years, with significantconsequences for life chances, social resilience, and economic strengthPage 1 of 3		Date originally posted: 2022-02-14Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/extractive-capitalism-britain/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/Poverty	and	inequality	levels	are	ultimately	rooted	in	the	outcome	of	the	political	and	economic	power	games	thatplay	out	between	big	business,	state,	and	society.	With	the	exception	of	the	immediate	post-war	era,	the	strugglesfor	share	over	the	last	200	years	have	been	won	by	the	richest	and	most	affluent	sections	of	society,	often	with	thecompliance	of	the	state.For	most	of	the	nineteenth	century,	Britain	was	a	near-plutocracy,	with	society	run	mostly	by	and	for	the	richestsections	of	society.	Colossal	and	heavily	concentrated	wealth	sat	beside	crushing	poverty	through	a	form	ofcollective	monopoly	power	exercised	by	a	small	landowning,	industrial	and	financial	elite.	The	governing	andwealthy	classes	created	a	form	of	‘extractive	capitalism’	aimed	at	securing	a	disproportionate	share	of	the	economicgains	from	industrialism,	often	by	steering	economic	resources	into	unproductive	use,	with	no	or	limited	addition	toeconomic	value.	‘The	efforts	of	men	are	utilized	in	two	different	ways’	declared	the	influential	Italian	economistVilfredo	Pareto	in	1896.	‘They	are	directed	to	the	production	or	transformation	of	economic	goods,	or	else	to	theappropriation	of	goods	produced	by	others’.The	long	high	poverty/inequality	cycle	and	the	strength	of	extraction	are	inter-connected.	The	cycle	has	only	beenbroken	once,	when	from	1945	the	bitter	ideological	battle	of	ideas	was	finally	won	by	pro-equality	thinkers.	Theachievement	of	peak	economic	equality	and	an	historic	low	for	poverty	in	the	1970s	was	a	seminal	moment	inBritish	history.	Yet	it	was	short-lived,	with	the	ideological	baton	passing	to	a	group	of	New	Right	evangelists	whoproclaimed,	falsely	as	it	turned	out,	that	a	stiff	dose	of	inequality	would	drive	economic	progress.	As	Sir	KeithJoseph,	a	key	adviser	to	Margaret	Thatcher,	put	it	in	1976:	‘the	pursuit	of	income	equality	will	turn	this	country	into	atotalitarian	slum.’	From	that	point,	egalitarianism	was	replaced	by	an	entrenched	bias	to	inequality.	But	instead	ofcreating	the	promised	economic	and	entrepreneurial	renaissance,	the	new	licence	to	get	super	rich	simply	triggereda	second	era	of	extraction	and	of	Pareto’s	‘appropriation’	and	a	second	wave	of	high	poverty	and	inequality	that	isstill	in	place.Few	other	nations	have	applied	a	pro-inequality	economic	strategy	as	comprehensively	as	Britain	and	the	UnitedStates.	With	the	world’s	top	one	per	cent	emitting	twice	the	carbon	emissions	of	the	poorest	half,	the	return	ofextraction	also	lies	at	the	heart	of	the	global	climate	crisis.	Corporate	leaders	have	exploited	their	growing	muscleusing	business	practices	that	have	played	havoc	with	pay,	jobs,	and	livelihoods.	As	the	American	megabankCitigroup	wrote	in	a	confidential	note	to	its	clients	a	few	years	ago,	the	United	States	has	long	been	a	plutonomy,one	that	allows	‘the	economic	disenfranchisement	of	the	masses	for	the	benefit	of	the	few’.British Politics and Policy at LSE: Extractive capitalism: Britain has been a high-inequality, high-poverty nation for most of the last 200 years, with significantconsequences for life chances, social resilience, and economic strengthPage 2 of 3		Date originally posted: 2022-02-14Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/extractive-capitalism-britain/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/Examples	of	complex	and	carefully	hidden	extractive	devices	have	included	the	application	of	monopoly	powerthrough	the	ruthless	destruction	of	rivals	and	the	rigging	of	financial	markets,	to	the	‘skimming’	of	trading	profits	–	aprocess	City	traders	like	to	call	‘the	croupier’s	take’	–	and	the	engineering	of	company	accounts.	The	boom	in	theprivate	takeover	of	public	companies	since	the	millennium,	from	the	AA	to	Boots	and	Morrisons,	has	enriched	ageneration	of	private	equity	barons,	often	at	the	expense	of	the	survival	of	the	targeted	companies	themselves.	Thelong	list	of	companies	destroyed	by	such	financial	manipulation	include	ICI,	GEC,	BHS	and	Debenhams.	Underextraction,	economic	activity	becomes	detached	from	new	wealth	creation,	with	the	boost	to	profitability	and	risingcorporate	surpluses	of	recent	times	used	to	reward	executives	and	investors	rather	than	boost	productivity.	In	2019,global	stock	markets	paid	out	record	dividends	of	$1.37	trillion.What	has	been	at	work	is	a	form	of	levelling	up	at	the	top	by	levelling	down	at	the	bottom.		While	egalitarians	haveyet	to	regain	the	ideological	high	ground,	one	of	the	big	questions	of	political	economy	of	the	next	few	years	mustbe	the	extent	to	which	an	entrenched	anti-	egalitarian	model	of	capitalism	can	be	reformed?__________________Note:	the	above	draws	on	the	author’s	new	book,	The	Richer,	the	Poorer,	How	Britain	Enriched	the	Few	and	Failedthe	Poor,	a	200-year	history	(	Bristol	University	Press,	2021).About	the	AuthorStewart	Lansley	is	a	visiting	fellow	at	the	University	of	Bristol,	a	Council	member	of	the	ProgressiveEconomy	Forum	and	the	author	of	Breadline	Britain,	The	Rise	of	Mass	Poverty	(with	Joanna	Mack,2015)	and	The	Cost	of	Inequality	(2011).				British Politics and Policy at LSE: Extractive capitalism: Britain has been a high-inequality, high-poverty nation for most of the last 200 years, with significantconsequences for life chances, social resilience, and economic strengthPage 3 of 3		Date originally posted: 2022-02-14Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/extractive-capitalism-britain/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/