Building Digital Resilience in Times of Disruption: A Multi-Case Study Analysis of Traditional Firms\\\\u27 Response to External Shocks

Association for Information Systems AIS Electronic Library (AISeL) AMCIS 2023 TREOs TREO Papers 8-10-2023 Building Digital Resilience in Times of Disruption: A Multi-Case Study Analysis of Traditional Firms' Response to External Shocks Ton Nu Huong Giang Hoang National University of Singapore, gianghoang@u.nus.edu Hock-Hai Teo National University of Singapore, disteohh@nus.edu.sg Follow this and additional works at: https://aisel.aisnet.org/treos_amcis2023 Recommended Citation Hoang, Ton Nu Huong Giang and Teo, Hock-Hai, "Building Digital Resilience in Times of Disruption: A Multi-Case Study Analysis of Traditional Firms' Response to External Shocks" (2023). AMCIS 2023 TREOs. 32. https://aisel.aisnet.org/treos_amcis2023/32 This material is brought to you by the TREO Papers at AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). It has been accepted for inclusion in AMCIS 2023 TREOs by an authorized administrator of AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). For more information, please contact elibrary@aisnet.org.  Navigating Disruption through Digital Resilience    Twenty-ninth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Panama, 2023 1 Building Digital Resilience in Times of Disruption: A Multi-Case Study Analysis of Traditional Firms' Response to External Shocks TREO Talk Paper  HOANG Ton Nu Huong Giang National University of Singapore gianghoang@u.nus.edu   TEO Hock-Hai National University of Singapore teohh@comp.nus.edu.sg Abstract  In contrast to the digital transformation approach employed during stable market conditions, firms are often required to adopt a more rapid and radical approach to respond effectively to massive external shocks. Massive external shocks, such as the recent COVID-19 crisis, have resulted in a dramatic shift in consumer behavior from traditional to online shopping, highlighting the need for organizations across various sectors to undertake rapid digital transformations to meet these new demands. This study, thus, investigates how traditional firms can achieve digital resilience by rapidly deploying information system (IS) resources to adapt to changes caused by massive external shocks.  We adopt an inductive multiple case study methodology to explore the digital transformation strategies of six traditional firms from various sectors that have succeeded in addressing the COVID-19 crisis. The findings reveal the emergence of two dissimilar groups regarding their identification of potential digital opportunities for mitigating suffering, their access to and utilization of critical resources, their undertaken actions, and their effectiveness in fostering digital resilience. The study contributes to the literature on digital resilience by providing an inductive, grounded theoretical model that expands upon existing literature; and provides practical guidelines for practitioners seeking to implement successful digital transformations during a crisis.  Acknowledgments This research was supported by the “Research on Innovating in a Digital Economy” Project, Social Science Research Thematic Grant, Ministry of Education, Singapore (Grant Number MOE 2017- SSRTG- 023).   