Resilience to climate shocks in the tropics

Environmental Research LettersEDITORIAL • OPEN ACCESSResilience to climate shocks in the tropicsTo cite this article: Mark Hirons et al 2020 Environ. Res. Lett. 15 100203 View the article online for updates and enhancements.This content was downloaded from IP address 92.18.185.222 on 07/10/2020 at 13:29Environ. Res. Lett. 15 (2020) 100203 https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abb156Environmental Research LettersOPEN ACCESSRECEIVED20 January 2020REVISED3 February 2020ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION21 August 2020PUBLISHED30 September 2020Original content fromthis work may be usedunder the terms of theCreative CommonsAttribution 4.0 licence.Any further distributionof this work mustmaintain attribution tothe author(s) and the titleof the work, journalcitation and DOI.EDITORIALResilience to climate shocks in the tropicsMark Hirons1, Emilie Beauchamp2, StephenWhitfield3, Declan Conway4, Rebecca Asare5and Yadvinder Malhi11 University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom2 International Institute of Environment and Development (IIED), London, United Kingdom3 University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom4 London School of Economics and Political Science, London, United Kingdom5 Nature Conservation Research Centre, Accra, GhanaE-mail: mark.hirons@ouce.ox.ac.ukKeywords: resilience, climate change, El Niño-southern oscillation, interdisciplinary, land-use, governanceAbstractThis focus collection on resilience to climate shocks in the tropics draws together 16 papers thatpredominantly examine the impacts of, and responses to, the 2015/2016 El Niño-SouthernOscillation event, in a range of contexts. This introductory synthesis contextualises the collectionof papers by reviewing important concepts and highlighting some important insights that emergefrom the collection. The papers in this collection collectively highlight: the value of longitudinaland interdisciplinary research in understanding both the roots of, and responses to, resiliencechallenges; the critical interaction between climatic and land-use changes; and the ways in whichgovernance arrangements underpin societal decision-making across a range of scales and contextsto shape resilience.1. IntroductionThis focus collection on resilience to climate shocksin the tropics draws together 16 papers that pre-dominantly examine the impacts of, and responsesto, the 2015/2016 El Niño-South Oscillation (ENSO)event. This episodic warming of sea surface temper-ature in the central-east equatorial Pacific has implic-ations for extreme weather patterns across the globe,particularly in the tropics (Timmerman et al 2018).The papers in this collection reflect the diversity ofimpacts associated with El Niño events and drawon both the natural and social sciences to investig-ate a range of social and ecological systems includ-ing marine, coastal and riverine environments, intactand converted forests, human settlements and multi-ecosystem landscapes. These ecosystems underpinseveral important economic sectors explored in thiscollection, particularly, agriculture, forestry and fish-eries. This introductory synthesis contextualises thecollection of papers by reviewing important con-cepts and highlighting some important insights thatemerge from the collection.The concept of climate resilience has gainedprominence in a range of research and development-related fields in recent years (Adler et al 2015, Brown2015). Although the term resilience is contested(Cote and Nightingale 2012) and often overlaps withrelated terms such as vulnerability and adaptive capa-city, its flexibility has helped facilitate a confluenceof different knowledge communities (Beichler et al2014). As a result, a range of framings are employedin research on resilience. These include differencesin emphasis placed on absorbing and coping withshocks and the ability to adapt and transform; theboundaries of systems examined; (i.e. what shouldbe legitimately included in resilience studies); differ-ing levels of focus, and perspectives on the distinc-tion between social, ecological or social-ecologicalsystems and temporal framings. Despite efforts toreconcile approaches to resilience (e.g. Allen et al2019), different framings may be mutually exclusiveor have strongly divergent approaches to distribu-tional and social processes and outcomes. This high-lights the importance of questions concerning resili-ence ‘of what?’ ‘to what?’.Increasingly, ‘climate change’ has become thefocus of ‘resilient to what?’ questions. Climate changerefers to both changes in average weather conditions(the climate) and the variance of weather patternsso the terms climate resilience and climate shocksinclude droughts, floods and storms within their© 2020 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing LtdEnviron. Res. Lett. 15 (2020) 100203 M Hirons et alscope. The 2015/2016 El Niño provides an excellentcase for studying climate resilience across contextsbecause of the varied range of weather extremes(rainfall distributions and quantities, and high andlow temperature anomalies) through which it mani-fests. Furthermore, as Rifai et al (2019) show, con-tinued warming associated with anthropogenic cli-mate change means that future El Niño events willexpose ecosystems and communities to novel climaticextremes, even if the magnitude of climate variabilityremains the same. El Niño events are an importantsource of extreme weather in a changing climate. Itis timely, therefore, that this collection draws on ana-lyses of 2015/2016 El Niño event to profile new find-ings and articulate future directions with respect toclimate resilience in the tropics.With respect to resilience ‘of what?’ questions, thepapers in the collection contain a diversity approacheswith somepapers focussing on ecological responses toEl Niño, others focussing primarily on social impactsand responses, while a third group examine the inter-section of ecological and social dimensions. We syn-thesise these papers by discussing the collection’s keycontributions across the following themes: (1) Thevalue of longitudinal studies; (2) The importance ofinterdisciplinary research; (3) How land-use changeamplifies climate shocks; (4) The role of scale; and (5)The centrality of governance.2. The value of longitudinal studiesUnderstanding resilience requires engaging with con-texts where there are a range of social and ecolo-gical processes interacting over different temporalscales. For example, ‘short-term’ climate shocks occurwithin longer-term changes associated with climatechange (Whitfield et al 2019). A significant limitationon advancing knowledge of how environments andsocieties respond to climate change and shocks is therelative paucity of long-term data sets, particularlyin tropical contexts. The skill in forecasting El Niñoevents and related climate anomalies and the relat-ively long time gap between El Niño conditions beingconfirmed and the impacts being felt provides anopportunity to research climate shocks that otherwiseare often over before research teams are able tomobil-ise. Insights from such studies also provide value inforecasting or preparing for impacts of future El Niñoevents on climate and society (Glantz 2015). Severalof the papers in this collection draw on data collec-ted before, during and after climate shocks. Takentogether these papers highlight the value of longitud-inal studies.This strength is clearly illustrated by Qie et al(2019) who monitored seedling dynamics in loggedand unlogged forests in Malaysia before, during andafter the El Niño. They show that whilst the droughtimpacted seedling development in all forests, inlogged forests recovery after droughts was character-ised by species specialising in establishing on severelydisturbed areas, suggesting the land may not recoverto its original forested state without managementintervention.In Ethiopia, Macdonald et al (2019) draw onlongitudinal data to compare the performance ofvarious water sources for rural communities wherewater scarcity is linked with violent conflict, missedmeals, school absences and poor health. Their ana-lysis demonstrated shallow boreholes with hand-pumps were the most reliable, and importantly, theyshowed that the performance and recovery of othersources such as hand-dug wells and springs declinedas the drought progressed. In southern Africa, themost intense drought event in the historical recordoccurred during 2015–16, suppressing groundwaterrecharge and leading to a major decline in ground-water storage in the Limpopo river basin (Kolusuet al 2019). Widespread socio-economic impacts ofdrought were also recorded in regional capital citiesGaborone and Lusaka, associated with disruption topublic water supply and electricity generation fromhydropower in the Zambia river basin, respectively(Gannon et al 2018). In both these cases, impactswereexacerbated by drought in the preceding year, high-lighting the importance of antecedent conditions ininfluencing impacts of specific El Niño events.As future research plans on climate resilienceare developed, it is imperative that they incorpor-ate strategies to support long-term research and datacollection campaigns to facilitate more longitudinalresearch, establish baselines and develop increasinglyrobust evidence-bases for interventions.3. The importance of interdisciplinaryresearchSeveral papers in the collection draw on interdiscip-linary methods to understand the deep interactionsbetween the ecological and social dimensions of resi-lience. Although the distinction between the ‘ecolo-gical’ and the ‘social’ has been increasingly blurred,this does not mean that different components of sys-tems respond uniformly to climate shocks.Wilkinson et al’s (2019) contribution demon-strates this clearly in their analysis of freshwater fish(Nematabramis everetti) populations in Borneo. Theyfind that while fish stockswere resilient to the droughtandmay actuallymore vulnerable to land-use change,the provision of ecosystem services related to fish(i.e. fish availability to communities) was negativelyimpacted as a result of the difficulty in fishing in shal-lower water.Interdisciplinary research can also help developtechnical insights that incorporate, for example,environmental and economic considerations. Smithet al (2019) exemplify the kinds of insights that can2Environ. Res. Lett. 15 (2020) 100203 M Hirons et albe generated by such approaches when they exam-ine how different treatments of manure can addressthe impacts of droughts on agricultural yields andcarbon storage. They demonstrate that using anaer-obic digesters to produce biogas and applying thenutrient-rich slurry to the soil generates the greatestbenefits, but, importantly, many households face eco-nomic and environmental (water availability) con-straints. Boillat et al (2019) assess the compare theon-farm effects of different Conservation Agricul-ture practices (reduced tillage, permanent groundcover and crop diversification) under ENSO-drivenrainfall variability in Kenya and Malawi. They showthat conservation agriculture practices can have apositive impact on resilience either in isolation aswell as when undertaken together. They highlightthe variety of ways in which farmers adopt agricul-ture to illustrate that agricultural interventions arenot ‘one size fits all’ and should adapt to consideragro-ecological and social conditions and flexibilityin adoption guidelines should be encouraged.The significance of recognising the social com-ponents of resilience is highlighted in broader termsby Morel et al (2019). They show how the location offarmers’ plots in the landscape, as well as issues suchas income diversification, gender dynamics and gov-ernment policies all interact to shape farmers’ vulner-ability. As well as providing a rich understanding ofthe dynamics of resilience, many of the studies in thiscollection demonstrate, and emphasise the import-ance of, moving beyond technical considerations ofhow to optimise production in efforts to pursue cli-mate resilience in agricultural communities.Further illustrating the value of interdisciplinaryresearch, Beauchamp et al (2020) show in their cross-case synthesis of factors affecting farmers’ adapt-ive capacities that purely quantitative approachesprovide limited insights to climate resilience in a gen-eral sense. This is because factors determining adapt-ive capacity are set within specific socio-ecologicalsettings, each of which are characterised by incom-mensurability in terms of the meaning and influenceof driving variables such as gender or land rights. Inaddition to integrating quantitative and qualitativemethods and ecological and social science approachesto climate resilience, Nunes et al (2019) show howmethodological diversity is essential to advancing dis-ciplinary understanding, in their case, by combiningremote sensing and field-based studies to examineleaf functional traits in rainforest canopy trees.4. Land-use change amplifies climateshocksClimate shocks do not occur in isolation from theirsocial and ecological contexts, they interact with arange of other factors. Decisions about the framingand scope of research and relevant policy arenas havea profound influence on outcomes; conceptual fram-ings, whether explicit or implicit, dictate what is seenand unseen, and consequently the issues that societies(attempt to) address and how. A key interaction thatseveral papers in this collection highlight, and whichresonates with the wider literature, is between land-use change and climate change and climatic shocks.Gregory et al show (2019) for example, how fine scaledifferences in micro-climate driven by interactionsbetween weather and land-use difference (such asbetween logged forests and oil palm) influence mos-quito life-cycles and subsequent disease transmissionpatterns. These interactions are not linear, as risingtemperatures for example, can push organisms suchas mosquitoes towards and beyond what is optimalfor their reproduction.The interactions between land-use and climateare vital to understanding future changes to ecosys-tems and their contributions to societal resilience.As Qie et al (2019) show, seedling development isdetermined by interaction of drought and loggingintensity. And as Rifai et al (2019) discuss, fires in theAmazon have been increasing in recent years becauseof the interaction of land use with a warming cli-mate, despite the decade-long (until 2019) reductionin deforestation rates (Aragão 2018). These interac-tions feed into wider climate-carbon cycle dynamicsassociated with land because of its role as an import-ant potential source of carbon dioxide. A key implic-ation of these interactions is that building resilienceto climate shocks also entails engaging with the widercontext in which shocks occur and developing anunderstanding of the interacting drivers of changewhich may be predominantly social, as in the case ofland-use change.5. The role of scaleMany of the papers in this collection articulate thechallenges associated with scale, an issue that has alsoreceived increasing attention in the literature (Whit-field et al 2019). Eggen et al (2019), for example,demonstrate the importance of understanding sub-seasonal rainfall variability (short duration extremesthat can have large impacts on yields). They show ina study of sorghum in Ethiopia how crop responsesdiffer between sub-seasonal extremes and seasonaldrought. At a finer scale, Kreppel et al (2019) showthat strong causal linkages have not been establishedbetween large-scale climatic variation driven by, forexample, El Niño, and micro-climatic conditionsthat influence mosquito behaviour, a critical con-sideration for insect-borne diseases such as malaria.Strengthening the evidence base for causal linkagesbetween El Niño events and socio-ecological impactsis crucial to underpin forecasting of, and preparationfor, future events.Shocks vary in the temporal duration. Wendlinget al (2019) draw on a data set going back to 19553Environ. Res. Lett. 15 (2020) 100203 M Hirons et alto constrain a system dynamics model to repres-ent the ecohydrological evolution of a Sahelian tigerbush over decades. The region experienced a pro-longed drought from the 1970s to the mid-1990s.They explore the paradox between decreased rain-fall and increased run-off. They show that the eco-hydrological system has two alternative stable statesand that during the drought it shifted from a high-vegetation/low-runoff regime to the alternative low-vegetation/high-runoff one. Although recovery maybe possible, the antagonistic effects of mean rainfalland rainfall variability make predicting future resili-ence of the system uncertain.Nkiaka et al (2019) show that timescale issues arealso at the heart of understanding user needs withrespect to weather and climate information. Provid-ing climate information services (CIS) that align withthe timely needs of different types of users acrossagricultural, disaster management and water man-agement sectors is crucial for beneficiaries to makelivelihood decisions that enhanced their resilience.Against a backdrop of low uptake of weather and cli-mate information, their findings show that greatercapacity building of personnel working for NationalMeteorological and Hydrological Services and Agri-cultural Extension staff is essential for improving theuptake and utility of CIS.Spatial scales are also critical. Beauchamp et al(2019) demonstrate how the factors that influencethe components of adaptive capacity are set withintheir specific socio-ecological settings. Reflecting onthe value of synthesising analyses they argue that sucheffortsmight havemore robust results if they are doneat the landscape or regional, rather than global, scaleas well as benefitting from a priori planning.6. The centrality of governanceQuestions associated with planning and the produc-tion anduse of science are central to governance.Gov-ernance broadly refers to processes by which soci-ety steers itself, including the norms, institutions, andsystems that shape how power and responsibilities areexercised, and how decisions are taken, by whom andwhy. Governance arrangements, mediate, inter alia,the link between knowledge and decisions, and aretherefore central to questions of resilience and adapt-ation.In this collection, O’Neill et al (2019) showpatron-client relationships in small-scale fisheries,which are a central organising feature of many small-scale markets, help buffer short-term shocks such asdrought, by providing loans to fishing communitiesto aide their recovery and re-establishment of activ-ities. However, these arrangements tend to entrenchparticular forms of governance and (fishing) prac-tices which, in this particular case, threaten the eco-logical integrity of fisheries and generally do not pro-mote or facilitate changes in practices or broaderadaptive capacity. Such arrangements, while under-pinning communities’ ability to cope with shock,risk constraining agency, collective action and self-determination within communities, and prove to bemaladaptive or to weaken resilience over longer timeperiods.Similarly, Touza et al (2019) highlight how short-term coping responses to drought in mangrove andmarsh dependent communities in the Caribbean canlead to system ‘lock-ins’ (Cinner et al 2011). Theseinclude adopting fishing practices that over-exploitparticular species and cause deterioration of essentialfish habitat, that might exacerbate future vulnerabil-ity. They highlight that addressing such maladaptiveresponses (see Juhola et al 2016) to shocks is partic-ularly challenging in contexts that are characterisedby perceived state abandonment and high levels ofmis-trust in authorities. However, they also argue thatopportunities to reduce vulnerability exist if collabor-ative and coordinated arrangements between differ-ent organisations can be fostered.7. Concluding remarksPapers in this collection, and in the wider literature,highlight a nuanced message; that while prevailinggovernance arrangements underpin existing patternsof resilience, they also pose a significant barrier to‘doing things differently’ in order to support moretransformative adaptation. This reflects a core tensionwithin resilience framings; the potential contradic-tion between absorbing shocks and adapting to futureshocks. The challenge for people aiming to addressclimate resilience is, therefore, how to understand anddisentangle different components of governance sys-tems and their effects. And how to do so in wayswhich are context-specific, that integrate insightsfrom the social and natural sciences and supportlocal resilience efforts. This challenge is particularlyacute when the incentive structures facing research-ers and policy-makers are often orientated aroundlarge global-scale work. This risks research beingdisconnected from the communities most impactedby climate shocks. This is particularly importantin the context of increasingly widespread authorit-arian regimes thatmarginalise scientific communities(Neimark et al 2019).The challenges associated with building climateresilience are many. As the final paper in the collec-tion (Beauchamp et al 2020) highlights, addressingconcerns of resilience to climate shocks will requiredeveloping longitudinal and interdisciplinary work incloser and wider collaborations across organisations,sectors and scales. This collection contains many out-puts of such collaborations and demonstrates themultifaceted insights that come from drawing on therich and diverse range of disciplines engaged withquestions of climate resilience under a variety offramings.4Environ. Res. Lett. 15 (2020) 100203 M Hirons et alAcknowledgmentsThe guest editors would like to thank all the authorswho contributed to this collection.Most papers in thiscollection have their genesis in the ‘Understanding theimpacts of 2015/2016 El Niño programme’ fundedby the UK Natural Environmental Research Council(NERC) and Department for International Develop-ment (DFID). This collection was facilitated by a syn-thesis and dissemination grant under this programme(Project Code: NE/P00394X/1).Data availability statementAny data that support the findings of this study areincluded within the article.ReferencesAdler C Eet al 2015 Resilience K Bäckstrand and E Lövbrand EdsResearch Handbook on Climate Governance (Cheltenham:Edward Elgar Publishing)Allen C R, Angeler D G, Chaffin B C, Twidwell D and GarmestaniA 2019 Resilience reconciled Nat. Sustainability2 898–900Aragão L Eet al . (2018). 21st century drought-related firescounteract the decline of Amazon deforestation carbonemissions. Nat. Commun.. 9–Beauchamp E, Hirons M, Brown K and Milner-Gulland E J 2020Twenty priorities for future social-ecological research onclimate resilience Environ. Res. Lett. 15Beauchamp E et al 2019 The role of quantitative cross-caseanalysis in understanding tropical smallholder farmers’adaptive capacity to climate shocks Environ. Res. Lett.14 125013Beichler S, Hasibovic S, Davidse B J and Deppisch S 2014 The roleplayed by social-ecological resilience as a method ofintegration in interdisciplinary research Ecol. Soc.19 4Boillat S, Jew E K K, Steward P R, Speranza C I, Whitfield S,Mkwambisi D, Kiteme B, Wambugu G, Burdekin O J andDougill A J 2019 Can smallholder farmers buffer rainfallvariability through conservation agriculture? On-farmpractices and maize yields in Kenya and Malawi Environ.Res. Lett. 14 115007Brown K 2015 Resilience, Development and Global Change(London: Routledge)Cinner J E 2011 Social-ecological traps in reef-fisheries Glob.Environ. Change 21 835–9Cote M and Nightingale A J 2012 Resilience thinking meets socialtheory: situating social change in socio-ecological systems(SES) research Prog. Hum. Geogr. 36 475–89Eggen M 2019 et al Vulnerability of sorghum production toextreme, sub-seasonal weather under climate change inhighland Ethiopia Environ. Res. Lett. 14 045005Gannon K E et al 2018 Business experience of floods anddrought-related water and electricity supply disruption inthree cities in sub-Saharan Africa during the 2015/2016 ElNiño Glob. Sustainability 1 1Glantz M H 2015 Shades of chaos: lessons learned about lessonslearned about forecasting El Niño and its impacts Int. J.Disaster Risk Sci. 6 94–103Gregory N, Ewers R M, Chung A Y C and Cator L J 2019 El Niñodrought and tropical forest conversion synergisticallydetermine mosquito development rate Environ. Res. Lett.14 035003Juhola S, Glaas E, Linnér B-O and Neset T-S 2016 Redefiningmaladaptation Environ. Sci. Policy 55 135–40Kolusu S R et al 2019 The El Nino event of 2015-2016: climateanomalies and their impact on groundwater resources inEast and Southern Africa Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci.23 1751–62Kreppel K, Caminade C, Govella N, Morse A P, Ferguson HM andBaylis M 2019 Impact of ENSO 2016–17 on regional climateand malaria vector 1 dynamics in Tanzania Environ. Res.Lett. 14 075009Macdonald et al 2019 Groundwater and Resilience to Drought inthe Ethiopian Highlands Environ. Res. Lett.(https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab282f)Morel A et al 2019 The structures underpinning vulnerability:examining landscape-society interactions in a smallholdercoffee agroforestry system Environ. Res. Lett. 14 075006Neimark B, Childs J, Nightingale A J, Cavanagh C J, Sullivan S,Benjaminsen T A, Batterbury S, Koot S and Harcourt W2019 Speaking power to “post-truth”: critical politicalecology and the new authoritarianism Ann. Am. Assoc.Geogr. 109 613–23Nkiaka E et al 2019 Identifying user needs for weather and climateservices to enhance resilience to climate shocks insub-Saharan Africa Environ. Res. Lett. 14 123003Nunes M H et al 2019 Changes in leaf functional traits ofrainforest canopy trees associated with an El Niño event inBorneo Environ. Res. Lett. 14 085005O’Neill E D, Crona B, Ferrer A J G and Pomeroy R 2019 Fromtyphoons to traders: the role of patron-client relations inmediating fishery responses to natural disasters Environ. Res.Lett. 14 045015Qie L, Telford E M, Massam M R, Tangki H, Nilus R, Hector Aand Ewers R M 2019 Drought cuts back regeneration inlogged tropical forests Environ. Res. Lett. 14 045012Rifai S, Li S and Malhi Y 2019 Coupling of El Niño events andlong-term warming leads to pervasive climate extremes inthe terrestrial tropics Environ. Res. Lett. 14 105002Smith J et al 2019 Treatment of organic resources before soilincorporation in semi-arid regions improves resilience to ElNiño, and increases crop production and economic returnsEnviron. Res. Lett. 14 085004Timmermann A et al 2018 El Niño–southern oscillationcomplexity Nature 559 535Touza Jet al 2019 Coping and adaptation to environmental andclimatic stressors in Caribbean coastal communities J.Environ. Manage. submitted 1Wendling V, Peugeot C, Mayor A G, Hiernaux P, Mougin E,Grippa M, Kergoat L, Walcker R, Galle S and Lebel T 2019Drought-induced regime shift and resilience of a Sahelianecohydrosystem Environ. Res. Lett. 14 105005Whitfield S et al 2019 Exploring temporality in socio-ecologicalresilience through experiences of the 2015–16 El Niño acrossthe tropics Glob. Environ. Change 55 1–14Wilkinson C L, Yeo D C J, Tan H H, Hadi Fikri A and Ewers R M2019 Resilience of tropical, freshwater fish (Nematabramiseveretti) populations to severe drought over a land-usegradient in Borneo Environ. Res. Lett. 14 0450085