Lessons on Policies That Strengthen Household Financial Resilience to Overcome Shocks: A Keynote Address by Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia, Vice President of the Republic of Ghana

Lessons on Policies That Strengthen Household 
Financial Resilience to Overcome Shocks:  
A Keynote Address by Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia, Vice President of the Republic of Ghana
By Mahamudu Bawumia
| JULY 2021 | CSD PERSPECTIVE 21-17 |
Introduction
Today marks the official launch of Financial Capability 
and Asset Building in Africa, or FCAB Africa, an initiative 
to work with financial-service providers and equip 
human-service professionals to broaden financial 
stability, security, and well-being. As FCAB Africa 
launches, the issue of financial resilience has never 
been more salient.
As we know, the world woke to a new pandemic at the 
end of 2019. Our country, Ghana, was hopeful that the 
virus would not affect us; we were spared during the 
Ebola outbreak in 2014 and 2015. However, on the 12th 
of March 2020, Ghana recorded its first two COVID-19 
cases, and the numbers kept increasing. Thankfully, 
through the dynamic leadership of the Nana Akufo-
Addo administration, a quantity of vaccines recently 
arrived in Ghana, restoring the confidence of 
Ghanaians in the country’s economy.
The pandemic has presented countries with enormous 
policy challenges. Policymakers have had to balance 
limited resources among livelihoods, health, food 
systems, commerce, and the associated recession. Like 
many developing economies, Ghana has faced tough 
choices because of its limited budgets and administra-
tive capacity.
As social and environmental stressors increase globally, 
one can anticipate multiple and frequent shocks that 
will require fast, agile, and well-implemented policy 
responses. In my remarks today, I will highlight the 
Government’s multi-stakeholder responses to mitigate 
the pandemic’s effects. The lessons I share may resonate 
in other sub-Saharan African countries and offer insights 
for improving the long-term resilience of all sectors.
This presentation addresses three critical questions:
1. How have governments responded to the COVID-19 
pandemic?
2. What policy responses have been successful?
3. What new policies are governments considering to 
foster resilient national cohesion moving forward?
How Have Governments Responded 
to the COVID-19 Pandemic?
In March 2020, when the pandemic arrived, govern-
ments, including the Akufo-Addo administration, 
responded quickly. In Ghana, our swift and viable 
responses have received praise from the WHO and other 
change-makers. The responses have three phases:
1. Emergency response
2. Recovery actions 
3. Resilience building
2
To curb the spread of the virus and rapidly provide 
support to severely affected households and busi-
nesses, we first instituted several emergency mea-
sures, including lockdowns, physical-distancing 
protocols, and closure of the country’s borders and 
airports. As the pandemic spread in our nation, eco-
nomic activity slowed. The projection for national 
economic growth was revised from 6.5% to 1.5%. 
Furthermore, partial lockdowns in some parts of 
the country hit individuals, business owners, and 
their employees hard. No or little income came in 
after businesses closed.
As African governments made targeted investments 
in hard-hit sectors and implemented vaccination 
plans, in Ghana, we understood the centrality of 
the macro-environment in shaping people’s capac-
ity to withstand and bounce back from the eco-
nomic shock. Thus, we established a Coronavirus 
Alleviation Programme (CAP). We lowered the cap 
on the Ghana Stabilization Fund (GSF) from the 
current USD 300 million to USD 100 million in order 
to allow for the transfer of excess funds to the CAP. 
And we adjusted expenditures on goods and ser-
vices. We also adjusted capital expenditures down-
wards by GHS 1.2 billion.
The Government further responded with a mix of 
other fiscal and monetary policies to stimulate eco-
nomic growth and reduce economic losses. Notable 
among these was the interest-rate reduction to 
13.5% as of June 2021, provision of stimulus pack-
ages, and credit secured from the International 
Monetary Fund (up to USD 14 billion) and the World 
Bank (up to USD 50 billion).
Given today’s focus on financial capability, I can 
imagine that most in the audience would be inter-
ested in knowing what the Government of Ghana 
did to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on 
financial inclusion, and perhaps specifically the 
banking sector.
The Ghanaian banking sector was on a fast recovery 
trajectory due to reforms introduced by the Bank 
of Ghana some two years before the pandemic. 
For the third quarter of 2019, the Monetary Policy 
Committee reported that the sector had become 
well-capitalized (with 23 universal banks), solvent, 
liquid, efficient, and profitable, with improved 
Financial Soundness Indicators proving that 
the reforms have had a positive impact on bank 
performance.
Additionally, the Bank of Ghana introduced raft 
measures and interventions in March 2020 to 
contain the impact of COVID-19 on the Ghanaian 
economy. These include reducing the Primary 
Reserve Requirement of Banks from 10% to 8% 
and the Capital Conservation Buffer from 3% to 
1.5%. Provisioning on loans classified as OLEM was 
reduced to 5% from 10%. The costs associated with 
mobile money and other banking transactions were 
reduced, and banks were directed to give morato-
riums on loan repayments. The central bank also 
reduced the GRR, Ghana’s interest-rate benchmark. 
These timely measures were crucial to preventing 
a reverse in the gains made in financial inclusion, 
especially in ensuring that the most vulnerable can 
continue to transact financially in easy and benefi-
cial ways.
In a nutshell, financial entities faced low profitabil-
ity, low deposits, high numbers of non-performing 
loans, and high operating costs. Shareholders 
anticipated low returns, and some were not expect-
ing dividends at the end of the 2020 financial year. 
Thankfully, the story was different in 2021. Many 
economic sectors and businesses in Ghana made 
reasonable profits (see the cases of BOST and GCB 
Bank). Although the pandemic continues to weigh 
upon the global economy, data from the Ghana 
Statistical Service indicate that the country’s econ-
omy is recovering. Growth reached 3.1% in the first 
quarter of the year.
Bank customers have experienced their share of the 
adverse effects from COVID-19, and their expecta-
tions of banks have changed significantly. Banks 
cannot go back to old ways of operating. Customers 
do not want to be exposed to environments that 
may increase their risk of contracting the virus. 
They have reduced visits to their banks, implying 
reduced investment and saving. Customers are 
also anxious about the future of banking and the 
resilience of their banks in withstanding shocks. 
Therefore, banks must create other effective 
channels in readiness for customer expectations 
and customers must be equipped with relevant 
3
financial knowledge and skills to engage effectively 
with the emerging banking paradigm. The vision of 
FCAB Africa is timely. It is a unique opportunity to 
expand the capacity of human-service profession-
als, who work in communities across the country, 
to deliver basic knowledge and guidance, and to 
promote improved finance.
As Ghana rebuilds, it is focusing on longer-term 
strategies to create resilient social, economic, and 
health systems. The Akufo-Addo administration 
has established a target of 5% growth by the end 
of the year, and our Government has outlined 
key strategies to aid in the recovery. The Ghana 
Coronavirus Alleviation and Revitalization of 
Enterprises Support (Ghana CARES) program is 
expected to raise GHS 100 billion to boost produc-
tive capacities of businesses and key sectors. The 
Government established the new Development 
Bank of Ghana with a EUR 170 million facility from 
the European Investment Bank. Additionally, to 
boost domestic revenue, the Government intro-
duced new taxes and levies in the 2021 budget. 
The revenue will meet expenditures related to 
COVID-19 and support other sectors.
What Policy Responses  
Have Been Successful?
The Akufo-Addo administration believes that policy 
should offer informed, timely, and cohesive solu-
tions that build credibility and confidence among 
citizens. However, policymakers had little evidence 
to guide decisions early in the pandemic. In addi-
tion, what worked in one place was not guaranteed 
to work in another. For example, countries like 
Egypt that rely on tourism and remittances were 
especially hard-hit, while Ghana’s high social com-
pliance with regulations enabled implementation 
and enforcement strategies that have driven quick 
recoveries. To chart a path forward towards more 
resilient national policy systems, our Government 
is looking beyond the current best practices to 
understand what has determined the successes 
and failures of policy responses.
It is increasingly clear that digital technology will 
play a key role in the new normal. The Akufo-Addo 
administration believes there are cost savings 
associated with going digital. Lessons learnt from 
the pandemic have revealed technological strate-
gies for reducing the costs of renting, building, and 
running brick-and-mortar businesses. Because of 
recent investments in large and expensive edifices 
to accommodate employees, fixed assets account 
for a significant portion of businesses’ balance 
sheets. Thus, with involvement from key stake-
holders in the national, business, and household 
embodiment, the Government is considering new 
workable policy responses to guide business opera-
tions. We believe that this direction in the post-
pandemic regime will ultimately reduce businesses’ 
operating costs and may improve affordable access 
to financial services and products, particularly for 
the most vulnerable citizens.
The Akufo-Addo administration is implementing 
adaptable, coherent, and coordinated policies to 
strengthen financial resilience in business and 
households. The quality of delivery systems is an 
important determinant of success. Government is 
supporting innovation to keep markets working 
while reducing disease transmission. For example, 
drone technology deployed in rural areas has sped 
up the transportation of medical supplies and 
samples for COVID-19 testing. Creative approaches 
are being introduced and scaled up quickly, creat-
ing business environments that enable public-
private partnerships.
I particularly want to highlight the move toward 
digital infrastructure, such as financial technol-
ogy, which has already significantly improved 
financial inclusion across sub-Saharan Africa. 
Our Government will continue to support the 
development of financial technology with good 
governance, as well as policies around privacy, 
data sharing, unequal access, and cybersecurity. 
These measures will better protect consumers and 
broaden access to affordable and beneficial finan-
cial services and products.
Conclusions and Moving Forward
COVID-19 led to multiple disruptions, but coun-
tries can apply lessons and principles to better 
4
respond to future crises. As we rebuild, the Akufo-
Addo administration is examining data on the 
interplay of health, economic, and social-policy 
actions in supporting rapid, evidence-based 
decisions. The Government is improving public 
delivery systems to quickly scale up and adapt 
social protections for the poor and vulnerable. 
Ghana is developing a more enabling business 
environment with flexible regulations to encour-
age private innovation in food, health care, and 
economic systems. This enabling environment 
encapsulates strong technology governance to 
ensure that digital tools are equitably accessed 
and not exploitative. Evidence from research proj-
ects such as FCAB Africa will be crucial in shaping 
future policy directions.
In our Government’s view, the success of these 
policies requires both strong administration and 
citizen trust in government. Strong administrative 
systems are characterized by sufficient human and 
financial resources, mechanisms for oversight and 
accountability, and independent public institu-
tions. During the height of the pandemic, it was 
revealed that weak administrative systems led to 
administrative bottlenecks and hoarding, which 
undermined cash-transfer and food-relief policies. 
Citizen trust in government erodes when social 
protection policies fail. Understandably, non-com-
pliance with lockdowns and vaccination hesitancy 
ensue. Governments must take such cascading 
failures very seriously.
Finally, the Government is developing various 
processes for improved coordination and admin-
istration so that policies are well-implemented 
vertically, horizontally, and temporally in ways that 
build citizen trust. Indeed, the COVID-19 pandemic 
has exposed the fragilities of our food, health, 
and general financial and economic ecosystems. 
However, the Akufo-Addo administration knows 
that we can move forward with the right evidence-
based policy changes, making these systems 
stronger, more adaptable, and more sustainable.
As Ghana and countries across the continent 
recover from the hardships of the pandemic, 
everyone, but especially vulnerable families, needs 
access to beneficial financial services and the 
knowledge and skills to make optimal financial 
decisions. FCAB Africa has the vision to meet this 
challenge, building evidence for programs and poli-
cies that advance the well-being of all. We share 
this vision and call on the relevant stakeholders 
to engage with this important effort. With that, I 
declare FCAB Africa officially launched.
Thank you.
Author
Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia has been the Vice 
President of the Republic of Ghana since January 
2017. He chairs the Government of Ghana’s 
Economic Management Team, which has respon-
sibility for guiding and rebuilding the Ghanaian 
economy. He is at the forefront of a broad, inclu-
sive development strategy in Ghana involving the 
leveraging of digitised government services in 
transforming the delivery of public services. His 
efforts have seen the development of a supportive 
technology ecosystem resulting, for example, in 
the rapid growth of a Fintech industry in Ghana. 
Dr. Bawumia holds a bachelor of science degree 
in economics (Buckingham University, U.K.), a 
master of science degree in development eco-
nomics (Oxford University, U.K.), and a Ph.D. in 
economics (Simon Fraser University, Canada). He 
has held academic positions as Assistant Professor 
of Economics (Baylor University, U.S.A.), Visiting 
Scholar (University of British Columbia, Canada), 
and Visiting Senior Research Associate (Centre for 
the Study of African Economies, Oxford University, 
U.K.). He has also served as Visiting Professor 
of Economic Governance (Central University, 
Ghana). As an Economist and a Chartered Banker, 
Dr. Bawumia has had a prestigious career, which 
includes serving as the Deputy Governor of Ghana’s 
Central Bank from 2006 to 2008 and the Resident 
Representative of the African Development Bank in 
Zimbabwe in 2011. He is a Fellow of the Chartered 
Institute of Bankers, Ghana. He has authored sev-
eral journal articles and has numerous publications 
to his credit, including Monetary Policy and Financial 
Sector Reform in Africa: Ghana’s Experience.
5
Suggested Citation
Bawumia, M. (2021, July). Lessons on policies that 
strengthen household financial resilience to over-
come shocks: A keynote address by Dr. Mahamudu 
Bawumia, Vice President of the Republic of Ghana 
(CSD Perspective No. 21-17). Washington University, 
Center for Social Development.
Campus Box 1196
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63130-4899
csd.wustl.edu
