Introduction: The Adaptive Water Governance Project: Assessing Law, Resilience and Governance in Regional Socio-Ecological Water Systems Facing a Changing Climate

Idaho Law Review
Volume 51 | Number 1 Article 1
April 2015
Introduction: The Adaptive Water Governance
Project: Assessing Law, Resilience and Governance
in Regional Socio-Ecological Water Systems Facing
a Changing Climate
Barbara Cosens
Lance Gunderson
Brian Chaffin
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.law.uidaho.edu/idaho-law-review
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ UIdaho Law. It has been accepted for inclusion in Idaho Law Review by
an authorized editor of Digital Commons @ UIdaho Law. For more information, please contact annablaine@uidaho.edu.
Recommended Citation
Barbara Cosens, Lance Gunderson & Brian Chaffin, Introduction: The Adaptive Water Governance Project: Assessing Law, Resilience and
Governance in Regional Socio-Ecological Water Systems Facing a Changing Climate, 51 Idaho L. Rev. 1 (2015).
Available at: https://digitalcommons.law.uidaho.edu/idaho-law-review/vol51/iss1/1
THE ADAPTIVE WATER GOVERNANCE 
PROJECT: ASSESSING LAW, RESILIENCE AND 
GOVERNANCE IN REGIONAL SOCIO-
ECOLOGICAL WATER SYSTEMS FACING A 
CHANGING CLIMATE 
INTRODUCTION TO NREL EDITION OF THE 
IDAHO LAW REVIEW 
BARBARA COSENS,* LANCE GUNDERSON,** AND BRIAN CHAFFIN*** 
The water understands 
Civilization well; 
It wets my foot, but prettily, 
It chills my life, but wittily, 
It is not disconcerted, 
It is not broken-hearted: 
Well used, it decketh joy, 
Adorneth, doubleth joy: 
Ill used, it will destroy, 
In perfect time and measure 
With a face of golden pleasure 
Elegantly destroy. 
Ralph Waldo Emerson1 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ 2 
II. THE ADAPTIVE WATER GOVERNANCE PROJECT ............................... 4 
III. THE LANGUAGE AND CONCEPTS OF RESILIENCE AND 
ADAPTIVE GOVERNANCE .................................................................... 6 
A. Resilience: Theories of Change in Social-Ecological Systems .............. 7 
B. Adaptive Governance ............................................................................. 9 
1. Structure .......................................................................................... 11 
2. Capacity .......................................................................................... 12 
3. Process ............................................................................................ 12 
C. Bridging Resilience and Adaptive Governance ................................... 13 
                                                          
 * Professor, College of Law and Waters of the West, University of Idaho, Moscow, 
ID 83844. 
 ** Professor, Department of Environmental Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA 30322. 
 *** NRC Postdoctoral Associate, National Risk Management Research Laboratory, 
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati, OH 45268. 
 1. Ralph Waldo Emerson, Water, in POETS OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE (W.H Auden & Nor-
man H. Pearson eds., Viking Press 1950) (1867). 
2 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
 
IV. RESILIENCE AND GOVERNANCE ASSESSMENT OF SIX 
NORTH AMERICAN WATER BASINS ................................................ 16 
A. Anacostia ............................................................................................. 17 
B. Columbia .............................................................................................. 18 
C. Florida Everglades ............................................................................... 19 
C. Klamath ................................................................................................ 20 
D. Middle Rio Grande .............................................................................. 21 
E. Platte ..................................................................................................... 22 
V. SYNTHESIS: GOVERNANCE OF WATER BASINS IN A 
CHANGING CLIMATE .......................................................................... 23 
A. Trajectory #1: Maintenance of Desired State ....................................... 23 
B. Trajectory #2: Loss of Resilience Latitude .......................................... 24 
C. Trajectory #3: Regime Shift ................................................................. 26 
VI. CONCLUSION ............................................................................................ 27 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
For more than two centuries, humans have collectively and intensively pur-
sued control of water resources throughout the United States. From the arid por-
tions of the southwest region to the relatively water rich east, humans have sought 
to control the pulses of surface waters, in part to avoid the ‘elegant destruction’ 
suggested above by Ralph Waldo Emerson. Indeed part of the twentieth century 
myth of taming nature was to modify basic ecosystem functions for the service of 
humans. Dams were built in the mighty rivers of the western United States – the 
Columbia, the Colorado and the Missouri—to control floodwaters and divert scant 
water resources for human and agricultural consumption. While substantially en-
hancing a narrow range of services for the benefit of certain sectors of society, such 
controls have also come at great costs to society—not just in fiscal terms of in-
vestment in infrastructure, but also in terms of loss of biodiversity, as indicated by 
the large number of endangered and threatened species and cultures. Moreover, the 
planned and inadvertent ecological changes associated with the development of 
water resources have led to unforeseen shifts in ecosystems characterized as the 
erosion of ecological resilience.
2
 
As the water resources of the U.S. have developed, and resilience has de-
clined, the ways in which humans have valued and governed these systems has also 
changed.
3
 Once viewed as providing sustenance to humans, water is now seen to 
supply a wide variety of ecosystem goods and services. Such manifold uses of wa-
ter include irrigation for agriculture, water supplies for major and minor urban cen-
ters, and water to sustain ecological structures and functions such as mitigation of 
flood and water quality. At the close of the 20
th
 century, sustainability became an-
other social objective, which extended the time horizon for achieving social goals 
                                                          
 2. See generally C. S. Holling, Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems, 4 ANN. REV. OF 
ECOLOGY & SYSTEMATICS 1 (1973), available at http://www.jstor.org/stable/2096802?seq=1; RESILIENCE 
AND THE BEHAVIOR OF LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS (Lance H. Gunderson & Lowell Pritchard eds., 2002). 
 3. LANCE H. GUNDERSON ET AL., BARRIERS AND BRIDGES TO THE RENEWAL OF ECOSYSTEMS 
AND INSTITUTIONS (1995). 
2014] NREL EDITION 3 
 
and outcomes by considering the needs of future generations.
4
 As these systems 
have developed over time, the human dimensions (including institutions made up 
of laws, rules, social norms, and patterns of management) have become more com-
plex. Indeed, attempting to understand such patterns of complexity has led to inte-
grative scholarship that directs attention to linking the social and ecological com-
ponents of these systems.
5
 
Understanding the dynamics of complex social-ecological systems is urgent, 
as these resource systems are now facing new and relatively unknown changes due 
to changing climate. Broadly defined, climate is the long-term (decades to centu-
ries) pattern of precipitation and temperature in a particular area.
6
  In regional scale 
water systems, climatic patterns have been central to the design and management of 
such systems. For example, the Everglades region has a subtropical savanna cli-
mate; characterized by little seasonal change in temperature (rare freezing), with 
pronounced wet and dry seasons.
7
 As such, the management system has evolved to 
control flooding during the wet season, and to supply water to agriculture, urban 
interests and conservation areas during the dry season. In terms of the operation, 
the water system is managed according to this annual cycle. Yet a growing body of 
literature indicates that long-term changes in hydrologic processes are occurring, 
and hence fundamental assumptions of design and management must be revisited 
due to this loss of stationarity of ecosystem functions.8  Moreover, the types of 
events associated with climate change will continue to test the resilience of the 
coupled social-ecological system to respond and adapt to these broad scale changes. 
In her groundbreaking work, Nobel Laureate Elinor Ostrom put forward a 
framework for social-ecological systems to aid in understanding why some com-
munities self-organize to regulate their own resource exploitation to achieve sus-
tainability and some do not.
9
 As Dr. Ostrom was developing her theories, ecologists 
were building on the landmark work of Buzz Holling who introduced the under-
                                                          
 4. The concept of “sustainability” in environmental management is generally traced to the defi-
nition of “sustainable development” by the Report of the World Commission on Environment and Devel-
opment, which defines sustainable development as “development that meets the needs of the present with-
out compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.”  REPORT OF THE WORLD 
COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT: OUR COMMON FUTURE (1987), available at 
http://www.un-documents.net/our-common-future.pdf. 
 5. See NAVIGATING SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS: BUILDING RESILIENCE FOR COMPLEXITY 
AND CHANGE (Fikret Berkes et al. eds., 2013). 
 6. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change defines climate as follows: “[c]limate in a 
narrow sense is usually defined as the ‘average weather’, or more rigorously, as the statistical description 
interms [sic] of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period of time ranging from months to 
thousands or millions of years. These quantities are most often surface variables such as temperature, pre-
cipitation, and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical description, of the climate 
system. The classical period of time is 30 years, as defined by the World Meteorological Organization 
(WMO).”  INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE, FOURTH ASSESSMENT REPORT: CLIMATE 
CHANGE 2007: WORKING GROUP II: IMPACTS, ADAPTATION AND VULNERABILITY, app. 1 (2007), available 
at http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg2/en/annexessglossary-a-d.html. 
 7. See Ilmo Hela, Remarks on the Climate of South Florida, 2 BULL. OF MARINE SCI. 438 
(1952), available at  
http://idahoid.library.ingentaconnect.com/content/umrsmas/bullmar/1952/00000002/00000002/art00005. 
8  See P.C.D. Milly et al., Stationarity is Dead: Whither Water Management?, 319  SCI. 573, 573–74 
(2008), available at http://www.sciencemag.org/content/319/5863/573.full. 
 9. Elinor Ostrom, A General Framework for Analyzing Sustainability of Social-Ecological 
Systems, 325 SCI. 419 (2009). 
4 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
standing of the nonlinear behavior of complex ecological systems through the lens 
of resilience.
10
 With this new understanding, ecologists considered a new approach 
to manage complex non-linear resource systems and developed the concepts of 
adaptive management.
11
 Soon after adaptive management was applied, failures of 
this management approach gave rise to a new literature in which shortcomings in 
adaptive management were attributed in part to governance issues.
12
 The solution 
was dubbed adaptive governance.
13
 
This volume introduces the initial products of the Adaptive Water Govern-
ance (AWG) Project.
14
 The AWG Project does not seek to reinvent or critique the 
body of research on adaptive and environmental governance, instead we seek to 
add the role of law in adaptive governance approaches in heavily regulated and 
developed social-ecological systems. The AWG Project brings together ecologists, 
geographers and political scientists, all of whom approach their work through the 
lens of resilience, with legal scholars with a research focus on environmental and 
natural resources law and who have also begun to view that field through the lens 
of resilience. 
We begin with an introduction to the project, followed by the language and 
concepts of resilience and adaptive governance. We then move to a summary of 
each of the six basin assessments, and finally conclude with an initial synthesis of 
the lessons learned from the assessments relevant to the role of law in different 
governance trajectories. The six basin assessments then follow this article in six 
separate articles.  
II. THE ADAPTIVE WATER GOVERNANCE PROJECT 
                                                          
 10. Holling, supra note 2.  
 11. ADAPTIVE ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT (C.S. Holling ed., 1978); 
Carl J. Walters & Ray Hilborn, Ecological Optimization and Adaptive Management, 9 ANN. REV. 
ECOLOGICAL SYS. 157 (1978), available at 
http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev.es.09.110178.001105. 
 12. Thomas Dietz et al., The Struggle to Govern the Commons, 302 SCI. 1907 (2003), available 
at http://www.sciencemag.org/content/302/5652/1907.full; RONALD D. BRUNNER ET AL., ADAPTIVE 
GOVERNANCE: INTEGRATING SCIENCE, POLICY, AND DECISION MAKING (2005); Carl Folke et al., Adaptive 
Governance of Social-Ecological Systems, 30 ANN. REV. ENVTL. RES. 441 (2005), available at 
http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev.energy.30.050504.144511; Lance Gunderson & 
Stephen S. Light., Adaptive Management and Adaptive Governance in the Everglades Ecosystem, 39 POL’Y 
SCI. 323 (2006), available at http://research-
lega-
cy.arch.tamu.edu/epsru/Course_Readings/Ldev671MARS689/LDEV671_Readings/PolicySciences_gunder
son_light_everglades.pdf.    
 13. Gunderson & Light, supra note 12. See generally Brian C. Chaffin et al., A Decade of Adap-
tive Governance Scholarship: Synthesis and Future Directions, 19 ECOLOGY & SOC’Y, no. 3, art. 56 
(2014), available at http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol19/iss3/art56/ (discussing adaptive governance as 
a form of environmental governance). 
 14. The Adaptive Water Governance Project is a synthesis project on Social-ecological System 
Resilience, Climate Change, & Adaptive Water Governance, co-chairs Cosens, B. and Gunderson, L., with 
the National Socio-Environmental Synthesis Center (SESYNC) under funding from the National Science 
Foundation DBI-1052875.  
2014] NREL EDITION 5 
 
In November of 2010, Stockholm University held the first conference to bring 
together legal and resilience scholars,
 15
 in recognition of the fact that after several 
decades of work on understanding the complexity of ecosystems, the recommended 
solutions of adaptive management, and adaptive governance were yet to be widely 
implemented. This led to a special session at the Resilience 2011 Conference,
16
 and 
the publication of three collections on law and resilience.
17
 The resulting dialogue 
recognized that the law presents a barrier to more adaptive forms of governance 
due to its foundation in an understanding of systems as linear and its focus on eco-
nomic stability, and yet in the face of destabilizing forces including climate change, 
the law may also be the vehicle to introduce new approaches while protecting the 
social need for stability. The perspective legal scholars bring to the study of resili-
ence and adaptive governance is the recognition that legal systems, while establish-
ing boundaries and fostering a primary goal of economic and social stability, never-
theless are inherently adaptable and have throughout history responded to new 
challenges. This dialogue led to the proposal to the National Socio-Environmental 
Synthesis Center to bring together ecologists, resilience scholars and legal scholars 
for the Adaptive Water Governance Project.
18
 
The AWG project explores means to link ecological resilience and the law 
and policy governing the process of water management in complex, multi-
jurisdictional water basins. Its members hope to “contribute to the growing effort to 
connect concepts from science to policy decisions and to move social-ecological 
systems toward” sustainability even as the water balance and ecological changes 
resulting from climate change play out. 
The AWG project focuses on assessing resilience to climate change and the 
law in six regional scale watersheds or basins [Figure 1]. The AWG Project uses 
the setting of these major North American water basins as examples of heavily reg-
ulated and developed social-ecological system. We choose to ground the project in 
case studies to both contextualize our research,
19
 and enhance cross-disciplinary 
understanding through reference to real situations. A common goal that informs the 
work of the AWG team is to meet the challenge of posing solutions in recognition 
of the fact that we do not write on a clean slate. Rather than propose a new form of 
governance, we focus on bridging existing governance to proposed approaches ask-
ing how we might get there from here. 
                                                          
 15. Sturle Hauge Simonsen, The Law for Social-Ecological Resilience, STOCKHOLM 
RESILIENCE CENTER (Nov. 1, 2010), http://www.stockholmresilience.org/21/news--events/general-news/11-
1-2010-the-law-for-social-ecological-resilience.html. 
 16. Julie Anne Wrigley, Resilience 2011 - Resilience, Innovation and Sustainability, ARIZONA 
ST. U., https://sustainability.asu.edu/events/rsvp/resilience-2011 (last visited Jan. 20, 2015). 
 17. LAW AND SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL RESILIENCE, PART I: CONTRIBUTIONS FROM RESILIENCE 
2011 (Ahjond S. Garmestani et al. eds., 2013), available at 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/issues/view.php/feature/78; LAW AND SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL 
RESILIENCE, PART II: CONTRIBUTIONS FROM LAW FOR SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL RESILIENCE SYMPOSIUM 
(Jonas Ebbesson & Ellen Hey eds., 2013), available at 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/issues/view.php?sf=98. 
 18. See Social-Ecological System Resilience, supra note 15. 
 19. See, e.g., Stephen J. Toope & Jutta Brunnee, Freshwater Regimes: The Mandate of the In-
ternational Joint Commission, 15 ARIZ. J. INT’L. & COMP. L. 273 (1998). 
6 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
The AWG Project asks four questions on the role of law in adaptive govern-
ance. (1) What is the role of law in setting boundaries by identifying approaching 
thresholds or tipping points in the system? (2) What is the role of law in creating 
either a disturbance or window of opportunity in which adaptive forms of govern-
ance may emerge? (3) What is the role of law in presenting barriers to adaptive 
forms of governance? (4) What is the role of law in facilitating adaptive forms of 
governance? As in the interdisciplinary project itself, we begin here with an under-
standing of a common language. 
FIGURE 1. Map of the AWG Project Six North American Water Basins. 
 
III. THE LANGUAGE AND CONCEPTS OF RESILIENCE AND ADAPTIVE 
GOVERNANCE 
One of the challenges of interdisciplinary research is to develop a common 
language around concepts that form the communication base of a collaborative pro-
ject.
20
 The following sections provide the understanding of resilience and of adap-
tive governance used by the AWG team, while recognizing that these terms invoke 
                                                          
 20. ALLEN F. REPKO, INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH: PROCESS AND THEORY 263 (2d ed. 
2011). 
2014] NREL EDITION 7 
 
a variety of meanings in other contexts. Our goal is not to resolve debate over defi-
nition of these terms, but simply to build from a common platform agreed upon by 
the natural and social scientists and legal scholars in the study. 
A. Resilience: Theories of Change in Social-Ecological Systems 
The regional water management systems described in the basin assessments 
are defined by a great diversity in the aquatic, wetland and terrestrial ecosystems.  
While these ecosystems are dynamic and change over time due to non-human pro-
cesses, water management and the history of development of water control has led 
to dramatic shifts in ecosystem structures and functions. Such shifts are described 
in ecological theory as being controlled by the property of resilience. 21 Resilience 
can be defined as “a measure of the amount of perturbation a social-ecological 
system can withstand while maintaining its structure and functions; it describes the 
ability of a complex system to continue to provide the full range of ecosystem ser-
vices in the face of change.”22 
Since the concept was introduced to describe non-linear change in ecosys-
tems, resilience literature has shown that social-ecological systems can exist in very 
different configurations or regimes, each with sets of reinforcing feedbacks and 
persistence over time.
23
 Such alternative regimes can confer different sets of eco-
system goods and services. For example, undammed or uncontrolled rivers provide 
many provisioning, regulatory, aesthetic and supporting services, such as flood 
abatement, nutrient and sediment transport, food production and recreational expe-
riences. Damming of rivers has often switched the bundles of ecosystem services 
by trading off services such as aesthetic and biodiversity supporting services, in 
order to provide dependable water and energy supplies as well as reducing vulnera-
bility to flood risk. 
 How to reconcile such tradeoffs consumes much of the current research and 
practitioners debates. Since prior management activities have tended to reduce eco-
logical resilience, scenarios of climate and other global drivers indicate that ecolog-
ical regime shifts that can impact and alter the bundle of ecosystem goods and ser-
vices are more likely to occur in the future.
24
 
A system can be highly resilient either because it is quite adaptable (latitude) 
or quite resistant to change (resistance).
25
 Thus, a nutrient enriched lake that is 
characterized by algal blooms, low oxygen and changed fish communities may be 
resistant to returning to its original state when nutrient lading is reduced – it is 
therefore resilient but not necessarily something we label as good. A brutal military 
                                                          
 21. Holling, supra note 2. 
 22. See, e.g., BRIAN WALKER & DAVID SALT, RESILIENCE THINKING: SUSTAINING 
ECOSYSTEMS AND PEOPLE IN A CHANGING WORLD (2006). 
 23. RESILIENCE AND THE BEHAVIOR OF LARGE SCALE SYSTEMS (Lance H. Gunderson & Low-
ell Pritchard eds., 2002); WALKER & SALT, supra note 22.  
 24. See, e.g., T.P. Hughes et al., Climate Change, Human Impacts, and the Resilience of Coral 
Reefs, 301 SCI. 929 (2003). See generally NATURE’S SERVICES: SOCIETAL DEPENDENCE ON NATURAL 
ECOSYSTEMS (Gretchen Daily ed., 1997).  
 25. Brian Walker et al., Resilience, Adaptability and Transformability in Social-ecological Sys-
tems, 9 ECOLOGY AND SOC’Y, no. 2, art. 5 (2004), available at 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/. 
8 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
dictatorship may be highly resistant to change—it is therefore resilient but not nec-
essarily something we label as good. We find it more useful to discuss societal 
goals such as sustainability or the maintenance of ecosystem function, as an emer-
gent outcome from a system of governance. What resilience brings to the discus-
sion is a different perspective in terms of how we respond, adapt or adjust our ac-
tions in a complex system to achieve societal goals that is linked to how the system 
responds to our actions. 
We view the property of ecological resilience to be non-normative or value 
neutral, unlike the concept of sustainability.
26
 However, society does make value 
judgments about alternative states. Indeed, much of adaptive governance is about 
contrasting and weighing alternative values of different ecological states. It is with-
in governance that the desire for a particular alternative state is expressed, it is re-
silience – i.e. the system properties – that tells us how to get there within a complex 
system. 
A second bridging concept from the resilience literature, panarchy, provides a 
dynamic cross-scale lens through which both social-ecological systems and their 
systems of governance can be viewed. 
27
 Panarchy describes the existence of sys-
tems in a nested, interconnected, hierarchy in various stages of growth, collapse, 
innovation and reorganization (Figure 2). Thus, within a social-ecological system at 
the landscape scale, are multiple interconnected smaller scale systems down to the 
microscopic in the ecological realm, and down to the individual in the societal 
realm. Panarchy expands the concept of resilience by recognizing that: a) resilience 
of a system declines as a system matures or develops; b) larger (slower) and small-
er (faster) scale processes interact and can both foster resilience; and c) cross scale 
interactions may play a role in transformations into new regimes in both ecological 
and social system configurations. These aspects of panarchy are also observed in 
our systems of governance. 
                                                          
 26. It should be noted that the disaster response literature has adopted the term resilience to de-
scribe the vulnerability of a community in terms of how quickly it will recover from a natural disaster. See, 
e.g., FEMA, CRISIS RESPONSE AND DISASTER RESILIENCE 2030 (2012), available at 
http://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/20130726-1816-25045-
5167/sfi_report_13.jan.2012_final.docx.pdf. This is the engineering definition of resilience and has a nor-
mative focus in contrast to our use of the definition from ecology. 
 27.  See generally Lance H. Gunderson & C. S. Holling, Panarchy: Understanding Transfor-
mations in Human and Natural Systems (Lance H. Gunderson & C. S. Holling eds., 2002) [hereinafter 
Panarchy]. 
2014] NREL EDITION 9 
 
FIGURE 2. Panarchy theory emphasizes four key features of change. One is the im-
portant role that diversity has during recovery after a disturbance, a role that can 
seed novelty, trigger invasions, or spawn innovation in the next sweep of the adap-
tive cycle (omega to alpha phases). Another is the role of stability between disturb-
ances (omega), where the pattern unrolls predictably as the system grows, as it ac-
cumulates capital and ultimately reduces resilience (r to K phases). Still another is 
the role of an increasing likelihood of collapse across spatial/temporal scales, as 
collapse at one scale can propagate to larger/slower scales when those scales are 
vulnerable (revolt). And still another is the inhibition of that process of spreading 
(i.e., cross-scale collapse) as the memory of the bigger and slower scales sustain 
lower scale recovery (modified from Gunderson and Holling 2002).28 
B. Adaptive Governance 
Governance refers to the means through which political actors choose goals 
and make decisions and the means through which they take action to achieve those 
goals; thus, governance includes not only the laws, regulations, policies, and pro-
cesses of government, but the formal and informal institutional frameworks in 
which government acts and private actors take a role in the political process as well 
as the societal norms that influence policy decisions. 29 Adaptive Governance is 
simply governance that allows adaptive processes to emerge.
30
 In this context, the 
                                                          
 28. PANARCHY, supra note 27 at 75. 
 29. Dave Huitema et al., Adaptive Water Governance: Assessing the Institutional Prescriptions 
of Adaptive (Co-) Management from a Governance Perspective and Defining a Research Agenda, 14 
ECOLOGY & SOC’Y, no. 1, art. 26 (2009), available at 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art26/; Patsy Healey, Transforming Governance: Challenges 
of Institutional Adaptation and a New Politics of Space, 14 EUR. PLAN. STUD. 299 (2006). 
 30. See generally Brian C. Chaffin et al., A Decade of Adaptive Governance Scholarship: Syn-
thesis and Future Directions, 19 ECOLOGY & SOC’Y, no. 3, art. 56 (2014), available at 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol19/iss3/art56. 
10 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
AWG Project working description of Adaptive Governance is that it enables socie-
ty to navigate the dynamic, multi-scalar nature of social ecological systems. Adap-
tive governance is appropriate when the system is complex (e.g. lies within multi-
ple jurisdictions), the system faces change with a degree of uncertainty (e.g. climate 
change) and the system is approaching a potential threshold or regime shift as evi-
denced by increasing conflict over resources (e.g. litigation), increasing scarcity, or 
actual identification of an approaching threshold by law or science (e.g. listing of 
species). 
Considerable scholarship has developed through empirical observation of the 
emergence of adaptive forms of governance to solve common pool problems in the 
face of uncertainty.
31
 These emerging or self-organizing governance mechanisms 
are variously referred to under the general umbrella of adaptive governance,
32
 or 
more specifically as community-based initiatives
33
 and collaborative co-
management.
34
 Many of the mechanisms are collaborative in nature and formed at 
the local level, often in response to the scale of a particular problem. Nobel Laure-
ate Elinor Ostrom in collaboration with her lab at U. Indiana took this work further 
by identifying the key attributes of the social-ecological systems in which adaptive, 
self-regulating processes emerge and setting them within their institutional set-
ting.
35
 Other resilience scholars have contributed to the understanding of the attrib-
utes of adaptive governance.
36
 
Rather than reproduce or critique those frameworks, the AWG Project seeks 
to extract those aspects relevant to legal systems by asking: what role may the law 
play in either preparing a system for adaptive governance or facilitating the adap-
tive governance process. The AWG Project has identified three areas of inquiry for 
assessment of the role of law in: (1) structure; (2) capacity; and (3) process.
37
 We 
also acknowledge that to introduce flexibility into governance while maintaining 
legitimacy, and to assure attention to all aspects of an interacting social ecological 
                                                          
 31. See generally ELINOR OSTROM, GOVERNING THE COMMONS: THE EVOLUTION OF 
INSTITUTIONS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION (1990); GOVERNANCE FOR THE ENVIRONMENT: NEW 
PERSPECTIVES (Magali A. Delmas & Oran R. Young eds., 2009). 
 32. Carl Folke et al., Adaptive Governance of Social-Ecological Systems, 30 ANN. 
REV. OF ENV’T & RES.  441 (2005), available at 
http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev.energy.30.050504.144511; Huitema, supra note 
Error! Bookmark not defined.; Chaffin, supra note 30. 
 33. RONALD D. BRUNNER ET AL., FINDING COMMON GROUND: GOVERNANCE AND NATURAL 
RESOURCES IN THE AMERICAN WEST (2008). 
 34. Per Olsson & Carl Folke, Adaptive Comanagement for Building Resilience in So-
cial-Ecological Systems, 34 ENVTL. MGMT. 75, 75–90 (2004). See generally JULIA MARIE 
WONDOLLECK & STEVEN LEWIS YAFFEE, MAKING COLLABORATION WORK: LESSONS FROM INNOVATION 
IN NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (2000). 
 35. Elinor Ostrom, Background on Institutional Analysis and Development Framework, 39 
POL’Y STUD. J. 7 (2011); see also Michael D. McGinnis, An Introduction to IAD and the Language of the 
Ostrom Workshop: A Simple Guide to Complex Framework, 39 POL’Y STUD. J. 169 (2011); Elinor Ostrom, 
A General Framework for Analyzing Sustainability of Social-Ecological Systems, 325 SCI. 419 (2009); 
Elinor Ostrom, A Diagnostic Approach for Going Beyond Panaceas, 104 PNAS 15181.  
 36. See, e.g., Folke, supra note 32; Huitema, supra note Error! Bookmark not defined.. For a 
eview of the literature on adaptive governance, see generally Chaffin, supra note 30.  
 37. Our initial thoughts on these areas of inquiry for analyzing legal systems are published at 
Barbara Cosens et al., Identifying Legal, Ecological and Governance Obstacles, and Opportunities for 
Adapting to Climate Change, 6 SUSTAINABILITY 2338 (2014), available at http://www.mdpi.com/2071-
1050/6/4/2338/pdf. This article continues the development of this approach. 
2014] NREL EDITION 11 
 
system, requires both diverse and inclusive representation, thus in addition to reli-
ance on the literature on adaptive governance, all three components (structure, ca-
pacity and process) incorporate concepts of “good governance.”38 
1. Structure 
Structure refers to the multi-level, multi-scalar response needed in the face of 
uncertainty and requires attention to both polycentricity (i.e. overlapping and con-
nected levels of governance)
 39
 across spatial scales. This type of structure includes 
“nested governance” e.g. a hierarchy in which coordination may occur at the basin 
scale, but flexibility exists for implementation at local scales.
40
 In layman’s terms 
the concepts of polycentricity and nested governance require the ability to respond 
to the same problem at different levels and scales, at the same level from different 
perspectives and to be able to communicate across those divides. It provides in ref-
erence to panarchy, the room for local governance to experiment and adapt while 
relying on larger scale governance for resources and stability. 
Structural considerations must also pay attention to the level or scale at which 
implementation is appropriate and the degree of inclusiveness.
 
This captures the 
notions of fit of management and response to purpose,
 41
 and subsidiarity (i.e. the 
concept that decisions should be made as close as possible to the individual citi-
zen
42
). Although recently adopted as furthering a conservative agenda in reducing 
the role of government, the principle of subsidiarity has broader origins, and has 
generally been intended to further individual empowerment within the context of a 
government that plays “a significant role in fostering the conditions for its imple-
mentation.”43  Subsidiarity increases the chances that feedback from the ecological 
system will be linked to the appropriate governance level and allows for greater use 
of local knowledge, increased speed in response to change and provides a means 
for small scale innovation under an umbrella of basin-wide stability (again, in ref-
erence to panarchy).
44
 
                                                          
 38. Thomas M. Franck, Legitimacy in the International System, 82 Am. J. Int’l L. 705 (1988); 
WORLD WATER ASSESSMENT PROGRAMME, UNITED NATIONS, WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT: 
WATER FOR PEOPLE, WATER FOR LIFE 370–384 (2003), available at 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001297/129726e.pdf#page=387. 
 39. Huitema, supra note Error! Bookmark not defined..  
 40. Vincent Ostrom et al., The Organization of Government in Metropolitan Areas: a Theoreti-
cal Inquiry, 55 AM. POL. SCI. REV. 831, 837 (1961), available at http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1952530; see 
also POLYCENTRIC GOVERNANCE AND DEVELOPMENT: READINGS FROM THE WORKSHOP IN POLITICAL 
THEORY AND POLICY ANALYSIS (Michael McGinnis ed., 1999); Huitema, supra note Error! Bookmark 
ot defined.. 
 41. Jeroen Rijke et al., Fit-for-Purpose Governance: A Framework to Make Adaptive Govern-
ance Operational, ENVTL. SCI. & POL’Y 22, 76–80 (2012). 
 42. Robert K. Vischer, Subsidiarity as a Principle of Governance: Beyond Devolution, 35 IND. 
L. REV. 103, 110 (2001).  We adopt this broader view of subsidiarity.  For application in a legal document, 
see e.g., Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, art. 69, Oct. 30, 2010, 83 O.J.(C) 74, which 
states “National Parliaments ensure that the proposals and legislative initiatives submitted under Chapters 4 
and 5 comply with the principle of subsidiarity, in accordance with the arrangements laid down by the 
Protocol on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality.” Treaty for the Functioning 
of the European Union, Oct. 30, 2010, 83 O.J.(C) 74, available at 
http://www.en.parlamento.pt/EuropeanAffairs/DisposPNsEN.pdf.  
 43. Id. 
 44. See PANARCHY, supra note 27, at 195–240.  
12 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
Assessment of governance structure to identify the role of law must include 
questions such as: What are the system boundaries? Who are the entities with au-
thority to make decisions, respond to, or influence the system you identified? What 
is the scope of that authority? Do all stakeholders who are affected by management 
of the system have representation within the structure?
45
 
2. Capacity 
Capacity encompasses both the resources and authority to respond to change 
(adaptive capacity),
46
 and the right and resources to have a role in decision making 
(participatory capacity).
47
 Adaptive capacity requires the availability of tools for 
adaptive management, such as the model administrative law for adaptive manage-
ment recently developed by Craig and Ruhl.
48
 Participatory capacity is primarily 
related to the local ability to participate in decision making. For marginalized popu-
lations, participatory capacity may require access to judicial processes to establish 
rights as a precursor to capacity building, as described in the basin assessments 
below. 
Assessment of governance capacity to identify the role of law must include 
questions such as: Who participates in decision making affecting the system? Do 
local leaders have the resources (including time and knowledge) to participate? 
How is information made available to those who are affected by decision making? 
What venues are available to express interests? What authority do management 
entities have to consider expressed interests in management actions? 
3. Process 
Process elements are the ones most frequently overlooked in the scientific ap-
plication of adaptive management and necessarily focus on assuring the resilience 
of society.
 
The degree of flexibility needed for more adaptive forms of governance 
that can manage the level of uncertainty associated with the impacts of climate 
change is in tension with the notion that a functional system of governance must 
foster stability. Appropriate process may aid in addressing this tension. Social resil-
ience requires that the processes used to achieve adaptive governance incorporate 
elements of “good governance” focused on equity and justice, captured through the 
                                                          
 45. Modified from the following workbook by the AWG Project in collaboration with the Resil-
ience Taskforce for IUCN to reflect a focus on governance attributes: RESILIENCE ALLIANCE, ASSESSING 
RESILIENCE IN SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS - A WORKBOOK FOR SCIENTISTS, 7–13 (2007), available at 
http://www.resalliance.org/index.php/resilience_assessment.  
 46. Claudia Pahl-Wostl, A Conceptual Framework for Analyzing Adaptive Capacity and Multi-
Level Learning Processes in Resource Governance Regimes, GLOBAL ENVTL. CHANGE 19, 354–365 
(2009). 
 47. See Huitema, supra note Error! Bookmark not defined., at 3. see also G.T. (Tom) 
aadgever et al., Assessing Management Regimes In Transboundary River Basins: Do They Support Adap-
tive Management?, 13(1) ECOLOGY & SOC’Y 14 (2008), available at 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol13/iss1/art14/; Susan S. Hanna, Institutions for Managing Resilient 
Salmon (Oncorhynchus Spp.) Ecosystems: the Role of Incentives and Transaction Costs, 13(2) ECOLOGY & 
SOC’Y 35 (2008), available at http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol13/iss2/art35/. 
       48.   Robin Kundis Craig & J.B. Ruhl, Designing Administrative Law for Adaptive Manage-
ment, 67 VAND. L. REV.  1, 50–59 (2014). 
2014] NREL EDITION 13 
 
lens of legitimacy and inclusiveness.49 Inclusiveness is addressed by participatory 
capacity. Legitimacy is addressed through processes that place bounds on the exer-
cise of discretion in implementation of flexible management; that consider both 
biophysical and social/economic timeframes in setting periods for adjustment; that 
establish processes to ensure accountability in adjustment of goals; and that provide 
an avenue for broad, inclusive public input.
50
 
Assessment of governance process to identify the role of law must include 
questions such as: What are the means to resolve conflicts? Are there multiple ways 
to participate? Who is left out? What groups are marginalized by these processes? 
Do any of the means of participation encourage problem solving, learning, critique 
of the decision making process, innovation, collaboration? What types of infor-
mation informs decision making (e.g. science, local knowledge)? How are the 
timeframes for adjustment of management actions set? How are the benefits and 
burdens of management of the system distributed? 
C. Bridging Resilience and Adaptive Governance 
The adaptive cycle described as a feature of panarchy above, is a useful tool 
for bridging concepts of resilience and adaptive governance. The adaptive cycle of 
complex systems not only describes non-linear change in these systems, but is also 
a building block for understanding the effects of cross-scale interactions (figure 2). 
We use the adaptive cycle here along with examples from the basin assessments to 
highlight the mechanisms responsible for the emergence of adaptive forms of gov-
ernance (figure 3). 
                                                          
 49. Thomas M. Franck, Legitimacy in the International System, 82 AM. J. INT’L L. 705, 713–25 
(1988); see also Daniel Bodansky, The Legitimacy of International Governance: A Coming Challenge for 
International Environmental Law?, 93 AM. J. INT’L L. 596, 603–06 (1999); Daniel C. Esty, Good Govern-
ance at the Supranational Scale:  Globalizing Administrative Law, 115 YALE L.J. 1490, 1515–21 (2006); 
UNITED NATIONS, WATER FOR PEOPLE, WATER FOR LIFE: A JOINT REPORT BY THE TWENTY THREE UN 
AGENCIES CONCERNED WITH FRESHWATER, 370–84 (2003); Barbara Cosens, Legitimacy, Adaptation, and 
Resilience in Ecosystem Management, 18(1) ECOLOGY & SOC’Y 3 (2013), available at 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss1/art3/. 
 50. Cosens, supra note 49.   
14 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
 
FIGURE 3. The Adaptive Governance Cycle. 
 
It is difficult to determine where adaptive governance begins or can begin rel-
ative to a social ecological system trajectory along the adaptive cycle, but empirical 
observations suggest that the development of adaptive governance is often the re-
sult of a perceived or actual resource crisis.
51
 During the early fore loop of the 
adaptive cycle (r or exploitation phase) the governance regime in river basin social 
ecological system generally encourages growth. In North American the existence of 
clearly defined rights to land and water is important in fueling growth.
52
 Similarly, 
clear definition of the rights to shared water basins are important and are reflected 
in North America in the form of international treaties
53
 and interstate compacts.
54
 
As growth and exploitation continues the system enters a more stable state of con-
servation (K phase), the focus of these governance tools shifts from development to 
implementation and enforcement in order to meet multiple, often competing social 
                                                          
 51. Brian C. Chaffin et al., A Decade of Adaptive Governance Scholarship: Synthesis and Fu-
ture Directions, 19(3) ECOLOGY & SOC’Y 56 (2014). 
 52. For example, the prior appropriation doctrine recognized by states in the western U.S. rec-
ognizes clearly defined property rights to the use of shared water sourcesSee generally, WELLS A. 
HUTCHINS, WATER RIGHTS LAWS IN THE NINETEEN WESTERN STATES 6–14 (1971). In contrast, until re-
cently Native American water rights although recognized (Winters v. United States), have not been clearly 
defined, contributing to the slower rate of economic development on Native American reservations. Daniel 
McCool, Winters Comes Home to Roost, in FLUID ARGUMENTS: FIVE CENTURIES OF WESTERN WATER 
CONFLICT 121 (Char Miller ed., 2001). 
 53. See, e.g., The Columbia Treaty, U.S.-Can., Jan. 17, 1961, available at http://www.crt2014-
2024review.gov/Files/International%20Documents%20ColumbiaRiverTreaty.pdf.  
 54. See, e.g., South Platte River Compact, Pub. L. No. 37, 44 Stat. 195. 
2014] NREL EDITION 15 
 
goals. At this stage, internal conflicts over goals and external disturbances causing 
resource scarcity may lead to the rise of new voices and the development of new 
legal mechanisms to redistribute benefits and curb the external impacts of resource 
exploitation.
55
 However, as the growth (K) phase persists, the optimization of re-
source management for the exploitation of select services and the implementation 
of the policies themselves lead to rigidity in management with considerable reduc-
tion in resilience latitude (i.e. little room for adaptation). This can be further exac-
erbated by interactions from higher scales that support growth in the face of scarci-
ty.
56
 At this point the system is vulnerable to internal conflict and to external dis-
turbance. The potential for collapse is high. 
It is also at this point that any strong interaction from social and/or ecological 
scales either above or below the system of focus can exploit the rigidity of govern-
ance causing a “release” i.e., a collapse or loss of function.57 As the system reor-
ganizes, so too does its system of environmental governance. The sudden release of 
previous governance controls during a crisis (Ω or “release” phase) creates space 
for a reorganization of those controls, often with new sources of input. In the wake 
of a resource crisis (e.g., a scarcity such as drought resulting in food shortage and 
economic loss, or failure to anticipate or control a flood resulting in catastrophic 
property damage), a leadership vacuum can appear. During this period of social and 
ecological “crisis” the seeds of adaptive forms of governance may be sown through 
the “creative destruction” of previously dominant governance processes.58 
It is the hypothesis of the AWG Project that a social ecological system pre-
pared to facilitate emergence of more adaptive forms of governance through devel-
opment of the appropriate structures, capacity and processes, will be more likely to 
navigate this transition smoothly without substantial disruption in social and eco-
nomic systems. The shift in governance needed during the transition from release to 
reorganization (Ω to α) in a system’s adaptive cycle is one in which space is creat-
ed for the “emergence” of adaptive forms of governance.59 Emergence is character-
ized by the infusion of new or dormant leadership, trust building amongst govern-
                                                          
 55. For example, the development of a major body of federal environmental laws such as the 
Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 USC §§1531-154; National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, 42 
USC §§4321-4370h; and Clean Water Act, 33 USC §§1251-1387, in the 1960’s and 70’s in the United 
States reflects this phase, as well as the legal recognition of Native American rights in federal courts de-
scribed in both the Columbia and Klamath River Basin assessments infra. 
 56. For example, federal subsidy of western irrigation in the United States may develop water to 
such a high level of efficiency based on historic water supply that little room remains for adaptation when 
faced with climate change.  
 57. See generally PANARCHY, supra note 27.  Examples of this might include: a lawsuit 
filed in 1988, when the US government sued the State of Florida for allowing nutrient releases from agricul-
tural fields to damage federal resources as described in the Everglades assessment infra; a disruptive judi-
cial or political action (e.g., enforcement of the Endangered Species Act and resulting changes in Reclama-
tion water deliveries described in the Klamath basin assessment infra, or extended drought as a result of 
climate change as described in the Middle Rio Grande basin assessment infra.  
 58. C.S. Holling & Lance H. Gunderson, Resilience and Adaptive Cycles, in PANARCHY: 
UNDERSTANDING TRANSFORMATIONS IN HUMAN AND NATURE SYSTEMS 25, 34 (Lance C. Gunderson & 
C. S. Holling eds., 2002); See generally JOSEPH A. SCHUMPETER,  CAPITALISM, SOCIALISM, AND 
DEMOCRACY (3d ed. 2008). 
 59. B.C. CHAFFIN & LANCE GUNDERSON, EMERGENCE AND INSTITUTIONALIZATION: ADAPTIVE 
GOVERNANCE AND THE ADAPTIVE CYCLE OF COMPLEX SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS (manuscript in 
preparation for Resilience: International Policies, Practices and Discourses).   
16 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
ance actors, and often, a trial-and-error method of establishing new or novel gov-
ernance mechanisms in an attempt to attain broader social and ecological goals in 
avoidance of the processes that led to earlier collapse in system function. 
As the new system configuration emerges and becomes dominant, the system 
moves from reorganization (α phase) back to exploitation (r phase). In order for the 
characteristics of adaptive governance to become lasting, some degree of “institu-
tionalization” must take place, e.g., a change in law, rule, or social norm, a signifi-
cant shift or devolution in decision making authority, or the recognition of an in-
formal adaptive governance network as a formal governance organization.
60
 The 
influence of cross-scale interactions is critical and law may play a prominent role. 
The degree to which an emergent regime of adaptive governance is institutionalized 
depends on constraints or catalysts emanating from scales above and below the 
system. For example, existing laws and policies could fail to support and even 
fragment emerging networks of governance actors, causing the failure of adaptive 
governance and the return to the status quo.
61
 On the other hand, a new or changed 
law may support emerging governance networks by providing adequate funding, 
authority, and the necessary legitimacy to formally reconfigure the system towards 
adaptive governance.
62
 These boosts in capacity have been termed “windows of 
opportunity” and have been shown to be essential for the ongoing institutionaliza-
tion of adaptive governance.
63
 As adaptive governance continues to develop along 
the trajectory of the adaptive cycle, the new system of governance will need to be 
recognized and solidified both formally and informally to varying degrees through 
changes in laws, policies, organizational structures, and social norms—the institu-
tionalization of adaptive governance. 
In reality, social ecological systems are nonlinear, even in their progress along 
an adaptive cycle. Thus, as discussed below, a system may move back from the 
brink of collapse through changes that include restoration of ecological function or 
redistribution of benefits from resources. Intervention from a higher scale such as 
the federal government may artificially fuel growth beyond the capacity of the ex-
isting system, but may also provide the stability and resources necessary for a 
smooth local transition or for restoration. We turn now to a summary of the six 
basin assessments, before returning to the theme of governance trajectories below. 
 
 
IV. RESILIENCE AND GOVERNANCE ASSESSMENT OF SIX NORTH 
AMERICAN WATER BASINS 
                                                          
 60.  Id. 
 61. See infra Part IV.B. For example, the broadly collaborative approach of the treaty review 
process may be undermined by resort of currently dominant interests seeking to maintain the status quo to 
Congressional leaders. 
 62. See  infra Part IV.C. For example, federal funding for the dam removal solution developed 
through local collaborative processes will be essential to institutionalization of the new governance collabo-
rations in the basin.  
 63. Per Olsen et al., Shooting the Rapids: Navigating Transitions to Adaptive Governance of So-
cial-Ecological Systems, 11, 1 ECOLOGY AND SOC’Y, at art. 18 (2006), available at 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art18/. 
2014] NREL EDITION 17 
 
Six articles in this volume each provide an assessment of a North American 
water basin. These assessments illustrate that with the onset of water balance im-
pacts from climate change some of the water supplies relied on in North America 
are close to irreversible thresholds that, once crossed, will alter natural ecosystem 
services and the adequacy of engineered infrastructure, potentially impairing exist-
ing water-based economies. This collection of articles forms the starting point in 
the AWG Project for assessment of our capacity to govern in the face of change by 
recognizing the conditions under which approaches to adaptive governance emerge 
and, in particular, the role of law in not only preventing and facilitating this form of 
governance, but in providing the boundaries that may trigger its emergence. Alt-
hough the AWG project goal is to identify the legal tools necessary for adaptive 
governance, it is also clear from these assessments that major investment in conser-
vation, green infrastructure, ecological restoration, and re-operation of dams,
64
 will 
be necessary to increase the adaptability of water-based economies in the face of 
climate change. In this call for investment, we echo the recent recommendations 
from the Johnson Foundation in its report on a six year study of U.S. water sys-
tems.
65
 
The six basin teams have used a variety of approaches that build off earlier 
approaches to resilience assessment,
66
 by adding assessment of governance and the 
role of law. By testing different approaches to evaluate basin governance, these 
assessments will form the basis for development of a governance assessment meth-
od as one of the outcomes of the AWG Project. The following sections briefly 
summarize each of the assessments. 
A. Anacostia 
The following paragraph introduces the Anacostia basin assessment by Craig 
Anthony (Tony) Arnold, Olivia Odom Green, Daniel DeCaro, Alexandra Chase, 
and Jennifer-Grace Ewa. 
The Anacostia is a watershed in Maryland and Washington DC that is tribu-
tary to the Potomac River which along with numerous other rivers, drains to the 
Chesapeake Bay (figure 1), and in contrast to the other basins in this study, the An-
acostia is predominantly urban-suburban with roughly one and a half million peo-
ple living within the watershed and only 30% of the basin devoted to forests or ag-
riculture. The river is highly channelized by human development with substantial 
loss of wetlands and is listed as impaired under the Clean Water Act, with the level 
of toxics and fecal coliform bacteria high enough to render human contact unwise. 
                                                          
 64. See Brian D. Richter & Gregory A. Thomas, Restoring Environmental Flows by Modifying 
Dam Operations, 12, 1 ECOLOGY & SOC’Y, at art. 12 (2007), available at  
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss1/art12/. 
 65. See THE JOHNSON FOUND. AT WINGSPREAD, NAVIGATING TO NEW SHORES: SEIZING THE 
FUTURE FOR SUSTAINABLE AND RESILIENT U.S. FRESHWATER RESOURCES (2014), available at 
http://www.johnsonfdn.org/sites/default/files/reports_publications/CNW_NavigatingToNewShoresFullRep
ort.pdf. 
 66. See generally LANCE GUNDERSON ET AL., ASSESSING RESILIENCE IN SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL 
SYSTEMS: WORKBOOK FOR PRACTITIONERS (2007), available at http://www.resalliance.org/workbook; 
Kristine T. Nemec et al., Assessing Resilience in Stressed Watersheds, 19, 1 ECOLOGY & SOC’Y at art. 34 
(2014), available at   http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol19/iss1/art34/ (presenting a simplified ap-
proach). 
18 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
The once rich aquatic life is substantially reduced and impaired due to both low 
water quality and barriers to migration, but no aquatic species are listed on the En-
dangered Species List. One of the dichotomies in the story of the Anacostia is that 
while its development has been in the name of economic growth, its status as the 
“Forgotten River” in this time of greater attention to restoration may be largely the 
result of its inhabitance by primarily low-income and minority populations. An 
aspect of the social system in the basin not apparent in our other basins is the lega-
cy of slavery both in the development history and the continuing marginalization of 
minority populations in the watershed today. Nevertheless, the river is part of the 
efforts to restore the Chesapeake Bay and has been listed as a watershed for nation-
al priority under various federal initiatives and has been the focus of restoration and 
economic revitalization initiatives by both the Maryland and DC governments. The 
basin assessment traces the history of the Anacostia from a watershed of forests and 
wetlands, to agriculture and navigation, to industrialization, to urbanization, to po-
tential restoration through development of green infrastructure. Numerous citizen 
and community-led watershed governance institutions have developed in recent 
decades and are involved in multi-agency and multi-stakeholder collaborations, 
increasing potential adaptive capacity. The primary legal driver of restoration has 
been the Clean Water Act. Climate change will likely intensify both storm events 
and dry periods, which – when coupled with land development pressures and exist-
ing impervious cover – will increase the quantity and velocity of stormwater runoff. 
The Anacostia basin assessment looks at alternative potential futures and the adap-
tive governance mechanisms necessary to achieve the more desirable of those. Of 
particular interest in the Anacostia basin assessment is the application of a new 
framework (Institutional-Social-Ecological Dynamics (ISED)) developed by lead 
author Tony Arnold, to understand the changes in three systems: institutional, so-
cial and ecological and the interaction of those changes in the social-ecological 
system. Application of the ISED to the Anacostia basin reveals that law and litiga-
tion have forced the emergence of more innovative solutions and that the rise of 
locally-based watershed organizations have been the vehicle for much of this inno-
vation. 
B. Columbia 
The following paragraph introduces the Columbia River basin assessment by 
Barbara Cosens and Alexander Fremier. 
The Columbia River Basin located in the Pacific Northwest is shared by the 
United States and Canada and is heavily developed for purposes of flood control, 
hydroelectric generation, irrigation and navigation. The authors approach to as-
sessing governance is to look at changes to key system variables through time in 
response to increased alteration of natural ecosystem services as infrastructure was 
developed to serve society. The authors focus on four specific historical time peri-
ods: (1) pre – Contact defines the era in which indigenous populations lived a sub-
sistence life style and were highly adaptive to changes in salmon runs and other 
natural variables, yet vulnerable to outside disturbance; (2) Contact defines the pe-
riod of transition from an indigenous society to one of European settlement in 
which both populations were reliant on either federal aid or eastern investment for 
survival, and settlers began changing the uplands through monoculture and the riv-
2014] NREL EDITION 19 
 
er through development of locks for navigation; (3) Dam building defines the peri-
od of the first half of the twentieth century in which heavy federal investment sub-
stantially changed the river hydrograph through development of dams for hydro-
power production, flood control and irrigation, including dams built in the river 
headwater in Canada as the result of an international treaty; and (4) Environmental 
Justice and Civil Rights defines a period beginning in the 1970’s in which assertion 
of rights by Native American tribes altered the power balance in river management 
and the resulting increase in capacity elevated certain tribes to co-managers of the 
fishery, yet to date the changes have been primarily in governance, with only small 
incremental changes to river operation and optimization for hydropower production 
continues to dominate. By mapping the changes to variables used to define system 
resilience, the authors note the severance of feedback to governance when flood 
control infrastructure and water storage alleviate direct impacts from extremes in 
water supply. The massive development of the river in the twentieth century in-
creased mainstem modularity and thus ability to hold back flood, but did so at the 
expense of habitat variability and diversity for salmon. While federal investment 
during this period greatly improved the lives of many reliant on the basin’s ser-
vices, it also increased the vulnerability of the basins iconic salmon populations. Of 
interest in the Columbia River assessment is the use of this mapping of resilience 
variables to identify the types of restoration needed to increase resilience latitude 
and move the basin away from a threshold. Climate change is likely to alter the 
timing of runoff to earlier, increase water temperature, and increase demand for 
both irrigation water and summer electric generation. The basin is currently under-
going a major review process for the Treaty with Canada that controls much of the 
operation of the river mainstem and it remains to be seen whether this will be an 
opportunity for introducing greater flexibility to basin governance. 
C. Florida Everglades 
The following paragraph introduces the Florida Everglades basin assessment 
by Lance H. Gunderson, Ahjond Garmestani, Keith W. Rizzardi, J.B. Ruhl, and 
Alfred Light. 
The Florida Everglades is a biologically rich subtropical wetland social eco-
logical system, within which water is managed to sustain urban, agricultural and 
conservation areas. The social ecological system supplies water to about 8 million 
people in the watershed, a multi-billion dollar agriculture enterprise, and the con-
servation needs of a U.S. National Park. Over the past century the system was al-
tered to ameliorate flooding, to supply water during drought, and to assure clean 
water. This massive effort to engineer control and stability of the Everglades water 
has fostered economic and human development along the southeast coast of Flori-
da, while at the same time eroding the ecological resilience of the natural biodiver-
sity. The authors describe a nonlinear process of water infrastructure development 
in response to flood events, with a shared (and shifting) responsibility between the 
state and federal governments. In response to a severe drought and rising popula-
tions, local water management districts were established under state law in the 
1970’s, with authority to manage water including distribution, flood control and 
water quality. Water quality crisis in the 1980’s led to initial diversion of pollution 
from agriculture away from locally valued resources toward federally protected 
20 IDAHO LAW REVIEW [VOL. 1 
 
areas and subsequent litigation ultimately led to development of wetlands to man-
age agricultural runoff and return flow. In the 1990’s, continued deterioration of 
environmental values led to an increased focus on ecosystem restoration culminat-
ing in passage of the Everglades Restoration Act in 2000 by Congress. Yet, inter-
ests reliant on the current engineering and management of the system have stalled 
implementation of this Act. Climate change predictions for the region suggest a 
shift in seasonal wet/dry cycles; changes in long term flood/drought cycles with 
great frequency and a shortened timeframe between flood and drought; the likeli-
hood of stronger and more frequent storms and rising sea level. Of particular inter-
est in the Florida Everglades assessment is the application of resilience to identify 
four types of change: 1) declining resilience over time due to flood control policies, 
increased development and rising sea level; 2) rhythms of stability and instability 
that have led to infrastructure development to respond to flood and drought, yet is 
not adaptive to changes in the frequency and magnitude of these events; 3) cascad-
ing change that may result from fire suppression or invasive species, but can also 
result from social change such as increase in value placed on restoration; and 4) 
windows of transformative change that include flood and drought, yet past response 
seeking to maintain the same type and level of services from the system with in-
creasing population has placed the Everglades region in a rigidity trap and thus 
vulnerable to the disturbances that are expected with climate change The authors 
look at three management strategies focused on system resilience: (1) management 
to avoid crossing a threshold such as a water quality standard; (2) management to 
reduce resilience and thus facilitate regime shift – a necessary approach for ecosys-
tem restoration and one that requires a high level of flexibility for experimentation; 
