Economic Resilience of German Lignite Regions in Transition

sustainabilityArticleEconomic Resilience of German Lignite Regionsin TransitionNora Stognief 1,2,3,*, Paula Walk 1, Oliver Schöttker 3 and Pao-Yu Oei 1,21 Workgroup for Economic and Infrastructure Policy (WIP), TU Berlin. Straße des 17. Juni 135, 10623 Berlin,Germany; pw@wip.tu-berlin.de (P.W.); pyo@wip.tu-berlin.de (P.-Y.O.)2 Department of Energy, Transportation, Environment, DIW Berlin. Mohrenstraße 58, 10117 Berlin, Germany3 Department of Economics, in particular environmental economics, Institute of Environmental Sciences,Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus—Senftenberg. Erich-Weinert-Straße 1, Building 10,03046 Cottbus, Germany; oliver.schoettker@b-tu.de* Correspondence: nes@wip.tu-berlin.deReceived: 7 October 2019; Accepted: 24 October 2019; Published: 28 October 2019Abstract: This paper recalls the development of the German lignite regions Rhineland and Lusatiasince 1945 to allow for a better understanding of their situation in 2019. We analyze their economicresilience, defined as adaptive capacity, using Holling’s adaptive cycle model. We find that theRhineland is currently in the conservation phase, while Lusatia experiences a reorganization phasefollowing the economic shock of the German reunification. Key policy recommendations for theupcoming coal phase-out are to foster innovation within the Rhineland’s infrastructures to avoidoverconnection, and to expand digital and transportation infrastructure in Lusatia so that thestructurally weak region can enter the exploitation phase. Future policymaking should take intoconsideration the differences between the two regions in order to enable a just and timely transitionduring which lasting adaptive capacity can be built.Keywords: coal phase-out; energy transition; coal transition; sustainability transition; Energiewende;just transition; structural change; regional economic resilience; adaptive cycle model; Germany1. IntroductionA global decline of the use of fossil fuels is crucial for reaching the 1.5 ◦C goal of the Paris climateagreement. At the same time, history has shown that past coal transitions have often had severe negativesocioeconomic consequences on the affected regions due to poor management [1]. Consequently,literature has put an increasing focus on the just transition towards sustainable social-ecologicalsystems [2–5].In this context, the concept of resilience, especially the evolutionary perspective using the adaptivecycle model (AC) [6], has inspired useful insights on how regional economies withstand majordisturbances [7,8]. We use this concept to address the situation of the two major German lignite miningregions that are currently undergoing sustainability transitions: the Rhineland in the western Germanstate of North-Rhine-Westphalia (NRW), and Lusatia in eastern Germany in the former GermanDemocratic Republic (GDR) (for the location of the regions see Figure 1).To analyze the coal transition in the two regions, it is important to understand the current stateof the energy transition in Germany. Climate protection advocates have long been calling for a coalphase-out, a claim which has since gained the support of the majority of the population [9]. As anattempt to comply with the Paris Agreement as well as a reaction to public opinion, the German federalgovernment implemented a commission for growth, structural change, and employment (the so-called“coal commission”) in 2018 with the mandate to develop a roadmap for the phase-out of coal, includingSustainability 2019, 11, 5991; doi:10.3390/su11215991 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilitySustainability 2019, 11, 5991 2 of 17a fixed end-date. Its recommendation of phasing out coal by 2035–2038 [10] is a compromise betweenclaims to phase out coal by 2030 to meet the Paris Agreement [11] and concerns of representatives ofthe lignite regions asking for sufficient time to manage the structural change. As of September 2019,the recommendations of the commission are currently being transferred and specified in the so-calledStructural Enhancement Act (Strukturstärkungsgesetz), to be passed by the end of 2019.Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 17 so-called “coal commission”) in 2018 with the mandate to develop a roadmap for the phase-out of coal, including a fixed end-date. Its recommendation of phasing out coal by 2035–2038 [10] is a compromise between claims to phase out coal by 2030 to meet the Paris Agreement [11] and concerns of representatives of the lignite regions asking for sufficient time to manage the structural change. As of September 2019, the recommendations of the commission are currently being transferred and specified in the so-called Structural Enhancement Act (Strukturstärkungsgesetz), to be passed by the end of 2019. Figure 1. Location of the study regions Rhineland and Lusatia. Germany already has some experience with coal transitions, namely from the former hard coal mining regions in the Ruhr area and the Saarland in the western part of the country. While past structural change in those regions has not been without difficulties, they can generally serve as positive examples in comparison to other international experiences [12–14]. Other regions that have yet to face similar transition can learn from the experiences already made, the good ones as well as the bad ones. However, the differences between individual coal regions usually do not allow for direct transfer of successful strategies from one region to another [13–15]. Instead, an investigation of individual prerequisites and conditions is required for each region in order to derive meaningful policy recommendations. To facilitate this process, we synthesize existing theories and frameworks on sustainability transitions and regional economic resilience in Section 2. In Section 3, we explain the methodology of the adaptive cycle model and its application to our specific case. We analyze our case study, the past development of German lignite regions, from a perspective of regional economic resilience in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. In Section 4.3, we then identify possible pathways towards a sustainable and resilient transition. We conclude with a discussion of the results in Section 5. 2. Sustainability Transitions and Regional Economic Resilience Why is it so difficult for carbon-intensive regions to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels even if alternatives are available? Old industrial areas tend to be subject to two phenomena: path dependence and carbon lock-in. Path dependence occurs when past events, such as an important invention based on fossil fuels like the steam engine, lead to further carbon-based developments and Fig re 1. ocation of the st y regions hinelan an satia.er any alrea y has so e experience ith coal transitions, na ely fro the for er har coalining regions in the hr area an the Saarlan in the estern art of the co ntry. hile aststructural change in those regions has not been without difficulties, they can generally serve as positiveexamples in comparison to other international experiences [12–14]. Other regions that have yet toface similar transitio can lear from the experiences already made, the good ones as well as thebad ones. However, the differences between individual coal regions usually do not allow for directtransfer of successful strategies from one region to another [13–15]. Instead, an investigatio ofi ivi al rereq isites a co itio s is req ire for eac regio i or er to erive ea i gf lolicy reco e atio s.facilitate t is r cess, e s t esize existi t e ries a fra e r s s stai a ilittra siti s a re i al econo ic resilience in Section 2. In Section 3, we explain the meth dologyof the adaptive cycle model and its application to our specific case. We analyze our case study,the past development of German lig ite regions, from a perspective of regional economic resiliencein Sections 4.1 and 4.2. In Section 4.3, we then identify possible pathways towards a sustainable andresilient transiti . We conclude with a discussion of the results in Section 5.2. Sustainability Transitions and Regional Economic ResilienceWhy is it so difficult for carbon-intensive regions to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels even ifalternatives are available? Old industrial areas tend to be subject to two phenomena: path dependenceand carbon lock-in. Path dependence occurs when past events, such as an important invention basedon fossil fuels like the steam engine, lead to further carbon-based developments and inventions [16,17].Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 3 of 17The concept of carbon lock-in is closely related; it denotes a situation where self-reinforcing mechanismsconsolidate a society’s dependence on carbon, seemingly creating increasing returns while putting upbarriers for sustainable alternatives [18].The research field of ‘just transition’ analyzes the question of how regions depending on fossil fuelscan transform towards a low carbon economy. Research questions evolve around political economyquestions of “who wins, who loses, how and why” [2]. Researchers analyze the existing distribution ofenergy, ask who lives with the side effects of energy extraction, production, and generation, and whowill bear the social costs of decarbonizing energy systems and economies [2,3,19].A distinction is made between two types of approaches to sustainability transitions: transitionmanagement and adaptive management. While both are closely related, they differ in their primaryobjectives: the former strives to steer change with a focus on creative capacity, while the latter aims tobuild resilience, focusing on adaptive capacity [20,21]. From a transition management perspective, Berloet al. [22], Vögele et al. [23], and Leipprand and Flachsland [24] have analyzed the energy transition inGermany using the multi-level perspective (MLP) by Geels [25]. Foxon, Reed, and Stringer [20] proposeto use both approaches, transition management and adaptive management, in a complementary way,combining the objectives of both. They propose that in the face of uncertainty, building resilience mayhelp sustain the pathways developed in transition management.In adaptive management, evolutionary interpretations of resilience are the most prevalent, whichmeans that most studies reject the idea of equilibria from engineering and ecological resilience.By contrast to the latter two interpretations, where systems always strive to reach steady states,evolutionary approaches focus on the long-term capacity of the system to adapt to changingconditions [26].This approach is widely used in the study of regions [7,8,26–28]. Boschma [26] proposes anevolutionary approach to regional resilience, where regions are resilient when they are able to overcomea trade-off between adaptation and adaptability in a situation of structural change. The more a regionadapts to specific conditions, the more it has to forfeit its capacity to react to shocks or disturbances.Fath et al. [29] define resilience as the capacity of a system to successfully navigate all stages ofthe AC. From a regional economic perspective, Courvisanosae et al. [8] define adaptable resilientregions as demonstrating “change in the nature of industry over time without significant reduction inemployment or income despite shocks (or perturbations)”.A widely used evolutionary model of resilience is Holling’s [6] adaptive cycle (AC) model.According to the AC, systems pass four sequential phases determined by the variation of threeparameters: potential, connectedness, and resilience. High resilience is equivalent to high adaptivecapacity, this means the ability to flexibly respond to disturbances [7]. Originating from ecology, the ACcan also be transferred to human systems, including regional economies [7,8,27,30,31].The AC has since established itself to become a popular tool in resilience research, not only in itsoriginal field, but also in the study of human systems. Fath et al. [29] have further explored the AC inthe context of the resilience of social systems, identifying key features for the success of a system aswell as investigating the typical pathologies systems can experience in each phase of the cycle. Slightet al. [31] have identified leverage points for each phase of the AC that can help regional economiesbuilding adaptive capacity and successfully navigate the AC. Rogov and Rozenblat [32] proposean approach that determines urban resilience by the interplay of adaptive cycles on three differentspatial scales.3. Materials and MethodsWe chose to focus on regional economic resilience because it offers a new and relativelyun-researched perspective on the issues surrounding the structural change in regions experiencingcoal transitions. This paper applies an evolutionary understanding of resilience using the AC, sincewe consider equilibrium interpretations of resilience insufficient to describe the complex dynamics ofregional economies. We transfer Simmie and Martin’s [7] framework of regional economic resilience toSustainability 2019, 11, 5991 4 of 17our specific case. The results then serve as the basis for developing future policy recommendationsconcerning the management of structural change in the two major German lignite regions.Since it is not an empirical, but a general model, the AC is intended to be used mainly metaphorically.The results of its application are supposed to encourage further research [30]. Therefore, this paperapplies the AC as a complement to existing approaches using related methods such as the MLP.The AC (Figure 2 and Table 1) is based on three key dimensions that determine the system’sresponse to disturbances and other events: (1) potential for change, determining the range of possibleoptions within the system; (2) internal connectedness, measuring system rigidity; and (3) resilience,determining system steadfastness to unexpected or unpredictable disturbances. The periodic changeof these variables constitutes the four phases of the AC: the reorganization phase (α), the exploitationphase (r), the conservation phase (K), and the release phase (Ω). Systems have two different, sequentialobjectives, depending on the current stage of the AC: either the maximization of production andaccumulation, or the maximization of invention and re-assortment [30].Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 17 to our specific case. The results then serve as the basis for developing future policy recommendations concerning the management of structural change in the two major German lignite regions. Since it is not an empirical, but a general model, the AC is intended to be used mainly metaphorically. The results of its application are supposed to encourage further research [30]. Therefore, this paper applies the AC as a complement to existing approaches using related methods such as the MLP. The AC (Figure 2 and Table 1) is based on three key dimensions that determine the system’s response to disturbances and other events: (1) potential for change, determining the range of possible options within the system; (2) internal connectedness, measuring syste  rigidity; and (3) resilience, determining system steadfastness to unexpected or unpredictable disturbances. The periodic change of these variables constitutes the four phases of the AC: the reorganization phase (𝛼), the exploitation phase (𝑟 ), the conservation phase (𝐾 ), and the release phase (Ω). Systems have two different, sequential objectives, depending on the current stage of the AC: either the maximization of production and accumulation, or the maximization of invention and re-assortment [30]. Figure 2. The adaptive cycle. Adapted from [30]. Table 1. Four phases of the adaptive cycle in a regional economy, the poverty trap, and the rigidity trap. Adapted from [6,7].  Characterized by Potential Connectedness Resilience Reorganization phase (𝛼) innovation and restructuring high low increasing Poverty trap  low low low Exploitation phase (𝑟) growth and seizing of opportunities low increasing high Conservation phase (𝐾) stability and increasing rigidity very high high decreasing Rigidity trap  high high high Release phase (Ω) decline and destruction low decreasing increasing Holling [6] describes the two most important dangers in the AC in case the system is lacking sufficient adaptive capacity: (1) the poverty trap and (2) the rigidity trap. Both are deviations from the original path of the AC. In the poverty trap, potential, connectedness, and resilience are low, keeping the system from progressing to the exploitation phase. By contrast, in the rigidity trap, potential, connectedness, and resilience are high. This state of overconnection may hinder beneficial innovations, which cannot establish themselves without prior destabilization of the existing regime Figure 2. The adaptive cycle. Adapted from [30].Table 1. Four phases of the adaptive cycle in a regional economy, the poverty trap, and the rigiditytrap. Adapted from [6,7].Characterized by Potential Connectedness ResilienceReorganization phase (α) innovation and restructuring high low increasingPoverty trap low low lowExploitation phase (r) growth and seizing ofopportunities low increasin highConservation phase (K) stability and increasingrigidity very high high decreasingRigidity trap high high highRelease phase (Ω) decline and destruction low decreasing increasingHolling [6] describes the two most important dangers in the AC in case the system is lackingsufficient adaptive capacity: (1) the poverty trap and (2) the rigidity trap. Both are deviations from theoriginal path of the AC. In the poverty trap, potential, connectedness, and resilience are low, keepingSustainability 2019, 11, 5991 5 of 17the system from progressing to the exploitation phase. By contrast, in the rigidity trap, potential,connectedness, and resilience are high. This state of overconnection may hinder beneficial innovations,which cannot establish themselves without prior destabilization of the existing regime [33]. Moreover,the rigidity trap is fraught with an increasing risk of catastrophic breakdown in case of a disturbanceaffecting the higher-level system that the rigid system has adapted to [6]. An example could be thedisappearance of a central actor that other actors depend on. Systems in the rigidity trap often try toavoid the release phase by unhealthy means such as a loss of outside connections and exhausting theirinternal resources in order to maintain the status quo [29].To transfer the model to regional economies, Simmie and Martin [7] have translated the keyattributes of the AC (see Table 2). In this work, we analyze the economies of the lignite mining regionsin Lusatia and the Rhineland in a similar fashion to gain new insights about their resilience in the faceof a disturbance, i.e., the impending coal phase-out. A result of this research shall be a conceptualframework applicable to other regions that are experiencing sustainability transitions.Table 2. Characteristics of the three parameters potential, connectedness, and resilience of the AC [6,7].Holling [6] Simmie & Martin [7] Application to OurStudy RegionsPotentialInherent potential forchange, determines therange of future options(the “wealth” of thesystem)Internal competences of firms,skills of workers, institutionalforms and arrangements,different types of infrastructuresCompetences and skillsin sustainable sectors(e.g., renewable energy),demographic structureConnectednessInternal controllability ofa system, reflects thedegree of rigidity ofcontrolling variables andprocessesPatterns of interdependenciesamong firms in the regionDiversity of regionaleconomy, patterns ofdependency on certain(esp. non-sustainable)industriesResilienceAdaptive capacity,opposite of thevulnerability of thesystem to unexpecteddisturbancesCapacity for innovation amongfirms and institutions, actors’general inclination towardsentrepreneurship and theformation of new firms,available investment or venturecapital, willingness of workersto re-skillCapacity for sustainableinnovation, R&Dexpenditures, intensityand personnelWe apply this framework to a comparative case study of the German lignite regions, the Rhinelandand Lusatia, drawing from existing research and descriptive statistics. The data and findings stem fromavailable statistical information about the regional economy and industry, a review of academic andgrey literature, and observations within the period from 2012 to 2019 that were made as part of threeresearch projects, several visits of the regions, and interviews of involved actors. The period betweenthe end of World War II and the final report of the coal commission in January 2019 was consideredfor the analysis since the developments during this period are the most relevant for understandingthe current situation. We present a timeline comparing both regions’ economic development and putit in the context of major events and disturbances. In addition, regional economic and demographicdata is considered. This information then provides the basis for aligning each region’s development tothe different phases of the AC in order to investigate their regional economic resilience. We assessthe risk of falling into the poverty or rigidity trap of the AC and derive policy recommendations forsuccessfully navigating the AC against the background of structural change that is likely to come withthe “Energiewende” and shut-down of the coal industry.Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 6 of 174. Results4.1. Adaptive Cycles from 1945 until PresentFigure 3 shows the economic development of the two regions over time, featuring notable eventsand categorizing them into the four phases of the AC. The underlying data is presented in Table 3.For both regions, the end of World War II marked the beginning of a reorganization phase, whichaccording to the AC is characterized by an increasing level of resilience, but also high uncertainty.In the post-war period, both German states made rebuilding their industries a priority. In the GermanDemocratic Republic (GDR), lignite was the only domestic energy source available. While the FederalRepublic commanded other resources such as hard coal, the lignite industry in the Rhineland remainedimportant nonetheless [13].Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 17 Democratic Republic (GDR), lignite was the only domestic energy source available. While the Federal Republic commanded other resources such as hard coal, the lignite industry in the Rhineland remained important nonetheless [13].  Figure 3. Adaptive cycles of the Rhineland and Lusatia (1945–2019), including a timeline and ligniteindustry data (until 2001: employment excluding power plants). Data source: [34–37].Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 7 of 17Table 3. Characteristics of the regional economies of the study regions and their correspondence to thethree parameters potential, connectedness, and resilience of the AC. Data sources: [34,36,38–44], partlyown calculations based on data.Lusatia 1 Rhineland 2 GermanyPotentialCompetences and skills in sustainablesectors (e.g., renewable energy),demographic structureLow Very highSettlement structure, centrality Rural, most districts areperipheralUrban, all districts are verycentralTotal population (2017) 1,157,609 2,440,995Population density Sparsely populated Situated in the denselypopulated state of NRWPopulation development Reduction by almost 10%since 2000; aging populationRelatively stable populationnumbers; average agestructureUnemployment rate in % (2018) 6.7 6.4 5.2GDP in % p.a. (2005–2015) 3.2 2.6 2.8Regional GDP in € p.c. (2015) 28,434 32,769 37,128Trade tax revenue in 1000€ p.c. (2015) 332 251 560Employment market Few large employers exceptfor LEAG and public sectorRWE largest employer;branches of many large firmsLabor productivity in € per working hour(2015) 41.47 53.26 51.50Available income in € p.c. (2015) 18,722 20,961 21,583Number of STEM-employees per 1000employees (2013) 37 45 37Share of employees with an academicdegree in % (June 2016) 12.1 13.1 15Share of school leavers with a universityentrance qualification in % (2011–2013) 31.1 48.1 35.3Share of the population with access topublic transport in % (2018) 3 83.3 95.44 89.7Broadband supply in % (2016) 52 87 75LTE availability in % (2019) 67.7 76.1 77ConnectednessDiversity of regional economy, patterns ofdependency on certain (esp.,non-sustainable) industriesLow to Moderate Moderate to HighLignite operator LEAG (since 2016) RWEDirect employment in the lignite industry(2017) 8,639 9,739Direct, indirect and induced employment(2016) 13,245 14,338Share of employees in the lignite sectoramong all employees subject to socialsecurity contribution (SSC) in % (2016)2.03 1.13 0.06Share of employees in the lignite sector(including indirect and inducedemployment) subject to SSC in % (2016)3.3 1.8Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 8 of 17Table 3. Cont.Lusatia 1 Rhineland 2 GermanyResilienceCapacity for sustainable innovation,Research and Development (R&D)expenditures, intensity, and personnelLow but increasing High but decreasingResearch intensity in % of GDP (2015) 0.5 1.04 2.01Change of research intensity in % p.a.(2005–2015) 7.5 −1.5 1.8R&D personnel intensity (share ofemployees subject to social securitycontribution) in % (2015)0.34 0.86 1.32Change of R&D personnel intensity in %p.a. (2005–2015) 4.5 −0.1 1.2Company start-ups per 10,000 persons fitfor work (2009–2012) 25.8 32.7 36.6Share of high-tech start-ups (2009–2012) 5.7 6.9 7.0Current phase in the AC Reorganization ConservationNumber of AC phases since 1945 5 (one entire cycle; start of anew cycle) 31 Consisting of the administrative districts (Landkreise/NUTS-3 units) Dahme-Spreewald, Elbe-Elster, Spree-Neiße,Oberspreewald-Lausitz, Bautzen, Görlitz, and the city of Cottbus; 2 Consisting of Städteregion Aachen, Düren,Euskirchen, Heinsberg, Rhein-Erft-Kreis, Rhein-Kreis Neuss, and the city of Mönchengladbach; 3 Residence withina proximity of 600m (bus) or 1,200m (train) to a stop with a minimum of 20 departures daily; 4 Data for the whole ofNRW (due to lack of data availability on district level).In the 1950s, the Federal Republic experienced a period of unexpectedly strong economicgrowth—the “Wirtschaftswunder”. In the AC, the “Wirtschaftswunder” happened alongside theexploitation phase, a time of great development opportunities and growth as well as a high levelof resilience. Until 1973, the yearly growth of the Federal Republic’s GDP was at least 5% [45].Areas with a traditionally strong industrial sector, such as the Rhineland in the federal state ofNorth-Rhine-Westphalia (NRW), especially benefited from this development.In the 1950s and 1960s, the remaining lignite firms in the region merged with RWE, a major companyin the energy and mining sector, partly owned by local municipalities. Consequently, RWE becamethe most significant producer of lignite in West Germany. The academic sector grew as well: amongothers, the research institute in Jülich was founded in 1956 and in 1966, the Rheinisch-WestfälischeTechnische Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen expanded to become a full university.By contrast, due to the planned economy of the GDR, the situation in Lusatia was much different.The standard of living was generally much lower than in West Germany. Nevertheless, the mid-1960smarked the start of the exploitation phase with significant growth of the lignite industry in terms ofemployment and lignite output (see Figure 3). Lignite mining and generation were (and still are) themost significant industries.In the Federal Republic of Germany, the 1973 oil crisis abruptly halted the period of strong growth,initiating the conservation phase. The Rhineland, however, was able to keep its status as an attractiveindustrial region. While this is indicative of high potential, internal connectedness also increasedand resilience started to decrease. As is typical for the conservation phase, most economic power isconcentrated in certain industries that have shown a competitive advantage in the previous phases andcycles. In case of the Rhineland, this includes the lignite industry, but also the chemical, aluminum,automotive, and food industries. Their primary aim was now to increase their efficiency in order toachieve higher returns. Figure 3 shows that lignite production increased during the 1960s and 1970s,albeit not as strongly as in Lusatia [34].For the GDR, the year 1971 marked a paradigm shift in economic policy due to the political changeof power. The new government’s first objective was to increase the standard of living, initially at theSustainability 2019, 11, 5991 9 of 17expense of productivity gains. This can be interpreted as the start of the conservation phase, which ischaracterized by growing stability, but also increasing rigidity [7]. While the Federal Republic wasable to compensate for the scarcity of resources caused by the oil crisis, the GDR had grown largelydependent on the Soviet Union for oil and gas imports. Its return to lignite once again gave specialimportance to the region of Lusatia, resulting in lignite production and employment increasing strongly.We argue that at this point, the system had fallen into a rigidity trap, a state of overconnection andadaptation to a dysfunctional higher-level system.As was the case for large parts of East Germany, the German reunification caused the regionaleconomy of Lusatia to suffer a considerable system shock that pushed it into a release phase. Largeparts of the lignite industry were shut down within a short period due to being unable to competewith West German energy producers in an open market. Similar shocks also hit other industrial sectorsin Eastern Germany. A period of very high unemployment rates ensued in Lusatia (and other partsof Eastern Germany), reaching their peak at around 21% in 2004 (own calculations based on [41]).Especially, young people left the region, causing a dramatic decline in population. This is an indicatorfor the plummeting of the system’s potential, which is typical for the release phase.Eventually, the regional economy of Lusatia progressed to another reorganization phase.The region’s lignite output and employment in the lignite industry have remained relatively stablesince the early 2000s, although at quite a low level compared to GDR times [35,36]. Lusatia is now thesecond largest lignite mining district in Germany, after the Rhineland. Other industries in the regionare much smaller. Among the larger ones are the chemical industry and the railway industry. Thereare two universities in Lusatia today and public sector employment is a major factor as well [46].4.2. Implications on the Resilience of the Regional Economies4.2.1. RhinelandThe regional economy of the Rhineland has developed steadily since 1945 and it is now in theconservation phase. The region benefits from a notable locational advantage: it is situated in the denselypopulated state of NRW, within close proximity to the major agglomerations of Aachen, Cologne,Düsseldorf, and the Ruhr area. Access to public transport in NRW is above national average, as 95.4%of the population have access as compared to the German average of 89.7% [39,40]. Three importantchemical parks and the German headquarters of various large international companies are located inthe region. The level of education among the population, the share of employees with a background inscience, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and the broadband expansion are above theGerman average [43]. Overall, these factors are indicative for a high potential for future development.Most other indicators are in line with the German average, such as GDP growth and labor productivity.Only a few indicators are below the German average: GDP, trade tax revenue, and available incomeper capita. Additionally, the unemployment rate, at 6.4% in 2018, is above average [43].Connectedness is moderate to high in the region. Lignite operator RWE is the largest employer,but at the same time the regional economy is diversified and there are numerous other companiesand industry branches in the region. There is a strong perceived dependence on the lignite industry,as several other major employers in the region are suppliers for RWE. Direct, indirect and inducedemployment of the lignite sector results in a total of 14,338 employees, who make up 10.2% of allemployment subject to social security contribution in manufacturing industries, but only 1.8 among allsectors [43]. The conservation phase is characterized by a high degree of connectedness between theactors in the system. If the regional economy becomes overconnected, it is at risk of falling into therigidity trap.Resilience of the Rhineland is high but decreasing. As part of the Federal Republic and dueto its close location to international markets (e.g., the Netherlands, France, Belgium, and the UK),the Rhineland has shown notable resilient capacity in the past and recovered from various disturbances,even from serious recessions following the oil crisis in the 1970s. At the same time, increasingSustainability 2019, 11, 5991 10 of 17connectedness leads to decreasing resilience during the conservation phase. At present, innovativecapacity in the Rhineland is in line with the German average while R&D intensity is stagnating [43](for more detailed information, see Table 3).4.2.2. LusatiaLusatia still suffers from the economic collapse following the reunification and its lasting impactson other sectors and companies. Since Lusatia is now again experiencing a reorganization phase,the future is still largely open. Overall, it does not profit from as many economic privileges as theRhineland and its potential can be characterized as relatively low. Lusatia is a quite sparsely populated,rural region with weak infrastructure. The largest city in the region is Cottbus, having 100,000inhabitants. Larger cities, like Dresden, Berlin, or Leipzig, are relatively far away and poorly connected.In the district of Spree-Neiße, only 61.3% of the population have access to public transport, this districtbeing the lowest ranking in in the eastern federal states. Overall, public transport accessibility in Lusatiaaverages at 83.3%, which is a few percentage points below the German average [39,40]. In addition,broadband and LTE coverage are far behind the German average [38,43]. As shown in Table 3,several economic key indicators, such as GDP per capita, labor productivity, and research intensity,are below the national average. However, other indicators suggest a narrowing of the economic gapbetween Lusatia and the rest of Germany. Unemployment rates have decreased significantly, fromover 20% in 2004 to 6.7% in 2018, and the region exhibits an above-average GDP growth rate [43].This reflects a positive economic development, especially in comparison with other regions in EasternGermany [41,47]. However, the mentioned positive indicators should be taken with a grain of salt,since the reduction of unemployment is partly due to emigration, and the above-average GDP growthshould be regarded in the context of its below-average basis.Connectedness is low to moderate in the region. On the one hand, lignite operator LEAG (formerlyVattenfall, until 2016) is by far the largest employer in the region and there are not many other largeemployers except for the public sector. Overall, 3.3% of all employees subject to social securitycontribution are employed directly, indirectly in, or induced by the lignite sector, and their share amongthe manufacturing industries is even higher at 17.5% [43]. Hence, to a significant part of the populationin Lusatia, the prospect of an impending coal phase-out feels like a major threat [48]. At the same time,the change of ownership in 2016 and the resulting uncertainty are indicative of low connectedness.Generally, an increasing level of resilience is typical for the reorganization phase. This means thata region in the reorganization phase would likely be able to adapt to a new course of developmentin the face of a major disturbance. However, the region’s innovative capacity is still rather low incomparison to the German average. In the past, the regional economy of Lusatia has not proven to beas resilient as that of the Rhineland. This appears to be largely due to the historical implications ofthe political system of the GDR [13]. This situation was aggravated by the fact that the region wasalmost solely dependent on the lignite industry and the absence of close-by international markets.Considering the region’s structural problems and the impending coal phase-out, there is a great degreeof uncertainty of future economic development, which corresponds with the reorganization phase.If resilience remains low, Lusatia may become at risk of falling into the poverty trap. However, thestrong growth of R&D expenditures and personnel intensity, as well as the comparably strong regionalGDP growth [43,47] might suggest that Lusatia might even have surpassed the poverty trap and is onits way into the exploitation phase (for more detailed information, see Table 3).4.2.3. Comparability with Other Regions in GermanyWith the Rhineland and Lusatia, we have analyzed two coal regions in different politicalsystems over the same period. To facilitate contextualization, the following section briefly comparesthe two study regions with two other post-mining regions: Lusatia vs. the Central German coaldistrict (Mitteldeutsches Revier) and the Rhineland vs. the Ruhr area. Table 4 gives an overview ofkey indicators.Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 11 of 17Table 4. Comparison of the study regions with the Central German coal district and the Ruhr area.Data source: [34,36,42,43,47,49–51], partly own calculations based on data (data from 2015, unlessotherwise noted).Ruhr Area 1 Rhineland Lusatia Central Germany 25,113,487(2017)2,440,995(2017) Total population1,157,609(2017)1,957,000(2016)Urban,very centralUrban,very centralSettlement structure,centralityRural,mostly peripheralHeterogeneous;ranging fromurban/central torural/peripheral31,394 (2016) 32,769 GDP in € p.c. 28,434 27,64019.680 (2016) 20,961 Available income in € p.c. 18,722 18,1638.9 (2016) 7.8 Unemployment rate in % 9.4 9.90(2019)[2018: 3,371]9,739(2017)Employees in coal miningindustry8,639(2017)2,414(2016)n.a. 1.13(2016)Share of coal miningemployees in % 32.03(2016)0.32(2016)1 Consisting of Bochum, Bottrop, Dortmund, Duisburg, Ennepe-Ruhr-Kreis, Essen, Gelsenkirchen, Hagen, Hamm,Herne, Kreis Recklinghausen, Kreis Unna, Kreis Wesel, Mülheim a.d. Ruhr, Oberhausen; 2 Consisting of AltenburgerLand, Anhalt-Bitterfeld, Burgenlandkreis, Halle (Saale), Landkreis Leipzig, city of Leipzig, Mansfeld-Südharz,Nordsachsen, Saalekreis; 3 Among all employees subject to social security contribution.The Ruhr area once was Germany’s most important hard coal mining region. Due to the coalmining and steel industry, the Ruhr area is the most densely populated region in Germany. However,already in the 1950s and 1960s, domestic hard coal mining became increasingly uneconomical, and thegovernment of the Federal Republic decided to subsidize hard coal mining and initiate a gradual,linear phase-out process, which recently ended in 2018 with the closure of the last mine. The mainreason for the prolonged subsidization was the protection of domestic coal production. Due to theslow and structured phase-out, social hardships for the miners could be largely avoided. However,it also resulted in very high costs and the region is still grappling with a lack of innovation andinitiatives for future generations. Due to the region’s dependence on the coal and steel industry, it wasrepeatedly affected by large unemployment rates, and a significant gap to the averages of NRW andGermany still prevails [13]. Within the 21st century, however, more diversified industries started toemerge especially in the southern part of the Ruhr area, increasing its resilience to future changes.The Rhineland, although not quite as densely populated, is an urban and very central region as well,and some parallels to the Ruhr area can be drawn which may aid the upcoming transition process.The Central German coal district, like Lusatia, is a lignite mining region in the area of the formerGDR. This region has started turning its back on lignite earlier than Lusatia for economic reasons after1990, and only a few mines and power plants are left in the region today. Despite some similaritiesto Lusatia with respect to economic strength and potential for innovation, the Central German coaldistrict exhibits a few advantages that Lusatia does not have. For instance, the region benefits from itsproximity to the cities of Leipzig and Halle (Saale) as well as having a more diversified industrial sectorof several chemical facilities. As a result, the share of lignite industry employees is much smaller thanin Lusatia [43]. This indicates a higher level of resilience for the Central German mining district aswell as a lower dependence on lignite compared to Lusatia. The comparison between the two regionsunderlines the peripheral location of Lusatia as one of the main challenges for the transition.4.3. Policy Recommendations for Building ResilienceAccording to Holling [6], functional diversity among a system’s components is essential forbuilding resilience. The goal of the following policy recommendations is to help the regional economiesto avoid or escape the typical traps and pathologies of their respective stages of the AC [29,52] andincrease their adaptive capacity with the help of the leverage points identified by Slight et al. [31].Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 12 of 17The leverage points are going to be translated into concrete policy measures that are applicable to theRhineland and Lusatia.4.3.1. Rhineland: Avoiding the Rigidity TrapSo far, the Rhineland appears to have successfully navigated all phases of the AC, which indicateshigh adaptive capacity. However, during the conservation phase, the regional economy must avoidoverconnection, self-reinforcement, and inflexibility [52]. This might happen if too many actors in theregion remain directly dependent on RWE’s coal business.In order to avoid the rigidity trap, Slight et al. [31] suggest increasing competition and promotingdiversity within the system by traditional policy instruments such as subsidies or tax incentives,as well as retraining programs for workers, attracting small businesses, twinning agreements betweencommunities, and the support of new product development in existing industries. Failing industriesshould not be subsidized as this causes merely a delay of the system’s collapse.Recent developments in the Rhineland point in the right direction and should be strengthened.In doing so, the region can benefit from the experiences made in the neighboring Ruhr area during thehard coal phase-out [53]. In the Rhineland, a strong infrastructure, a high density of universities andresearch institutes, as well as a diversified industry can be found [54]. Promoting networks betweenuniversities, research institutions, and companies may help create competitive and resilient structures,which keep companies in the region, attract new ones and lead to the foundation of start-ups outof university.The regional economy of the Rhineland is likely to handle the coal phase-out well if it managesto avoid a state of overconnection. Further diversification of the economic structure is key for themunicipalities, many of which largely depend on tax revenues by RWE and its contractors [54]. Whilethe energy sector is likely to remain significant, its focus should shift towards more sustainableindustries such as renewable energies, energy storage or energy efficiency. Another important factorthat was often neglected in previous transformation processes is the role of soft location factors for theattractiveness of a region. “Action Program Ruhr” and the “IBA Emscher Park” of the neighboringRuhr area are examples of how soft location factors can positively influence an entire region. Formerindustrial sites were transformed into landmarks and cultural sites in order to conserve the identificationwith the region and to facilitate the shift towards a new, more future oriented perception [13].4.3.2. Lusatia: Entering the Exploitation PhaseThe region of Lusatia has been in the reorganization phase for more than 20 years. This verylong duration might be indicative of a poverty trap. According to Holling [6], the poverty trap is adeparture from the adaptive cycle that occurs when potential and diversity are reduced to a pointwhere all three parameters—connectedness, potential, and resilience—are low. As identified by Fathet al. [29], a lack of direction may prevent the system from exiting the reorganization phase. In order toenter the exploitation phase, a system needs activation energy and the capacity to grow. As a leveragepoint for the reorganization phase, Slight et al. [31] suggest to support emerging businesses so that theycan progress into the exploitation phase. Possible economic instruments include supporting access tocapital, private venture capital funding, and infrastructure renewal.In the Lusatian case, the post-reunification period has clearly left its mark on the region due tothe closing of many GDR companies and the emigration of a large portion of the younger and oftenmore educated workforce. As structural data suggests, the region was not able to recover for manyyears. However, recent developments suggest that Lusatia is already on its way out of the povertytrap and moving towards the exploitation phase. For instance, the regional economy has started todiversify. This includes the foundation of a new entrepreneurship center in Cottbus, an innovationcenter in Senftenberg aimed at biotechnology and medical engineering start-ups, and a strongerfocus on tourism. Besides the already popular Biosphere Reserve Spreewald, a second major holidaydestination is emerging in the region: the artificial Lusatian Lake District, a restored post-mining area.Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 13 of 17Renewable energies may not only serve as a replacement for lignite, but can themselves generateemployment and be a motor for innovation [55,56]. The solar park in Senftenberg is one of the largestin Germany; two other major solar parks are located in Lieberose and Finsterwalde. In Lauchhammer,Vestas produces wind turbine blades for the global market.While these developments towards a more diversified and sustainable regional economy allowfor an optimistic outlook, further efforts are needed to get the structurally weak region back on track.Demographic effects lead to an increasing lack of skilled workers. Improving soft location factors canhelp encourage especially young people to stay or move to Lusatia. The region’s remoteness posesfurther challenges. Lusatia is in urgent need of improved digital and transportation infrastructurein order to attract new businesses. A step in the right direction is the designation of Lusatia as apilot region for the new mobile standard 5G. Research and development may be supported throughmeans such as a cluster strategy, the establishment of new research institutions, increased support forthe higher education institutions in the region, as well as the strengthening of their connections tocompanies. Post-mining landscapes should be restored in an environmentally responsible way in orderto create new natural habitats and areas for recreation. Together, the three focus areas—renewableenergies, science, and tourism—can be used to change the perception of Lusatia towards that of a‘green’ region.5. DiscussionThe objective of this paper is to analyze the regional economic resilience of the two largest lignitemining regions in Germany, the Rhineland and Lusatia, by means of Holling and Gunderson’s [30]adaptive cycle (AC) model and Simmie and Martin’s [7] application to regional economies.We use historical information and current economic data of the Rhineland and Lusatia in Germanyin order to find out how successfully the regions have navigated the adaptive cycle, corresponding tothe definition of resilience by Fath et al. [29]. We find that, since the end of World War II, the regionaleconomy of the Rhineland appears to have experienced three out of four phases of the cycle andprogressed to a phase of conservation. In the same period, the regional economy of Lusatia has gonethrough an entire cycle, with the economic shock following the German reunification having caused arelease phase, followed by today’s reorganization phase.We argue that overall, the Rhineland has shown more adaptive capacity than Lusatia over theperiod from 1945 until present. The Rhineland should therefore foster innovation within existinginfrastructures in order to reduce dependency on the lignite industry and avoid a state of overconnection(the rigidity trap). Possible measures are the promotion of networks between research institutions andcompanies, as well as the improvement of soft location factors. Lusatia, by contrast, is a structurallyweak region that has had difficulties to enter the exploitation phase. In order to leave the poverty trapand improve its adaptive capacity, Lusatia needs to attract new companies and promote innovation.The comprehensive expansion of digital and transportation infrastructure therefore is an essentialprerequisite, which may also strengthen the existing focus on tourism.When comparing the regions, it becomes eminent that the Rhineland has had much more timethan Lusatia to progress through the stages of the AC. For Lusatia, the upcoming coal phase-outis going to be the second major externally imposed transition within a much shorter period. Thismakes the situation more difficult economically and emotionally, especially since a considerable partof the population is going to have experienced both transitions. It is therefore even more important tomanage the coal phase-out in a structured and just way in order to minimize the impacts on the affectedpopulation. By learning from previous energy transitions and considering resource peaks and the risksof climate change, future transitions may be achieved in a much faster and more coordinated way [57].From an evolutionary perspective, a region is adaptable and resilient if it is able to overcomechanges in the nature of industry without significant impairment of its overall economic situation [8].Our results indicate that, given the prospect of an imminent coal phase-out, it is important totackle the structural change wholeheartedly and immediately, to harness and increase the regions’Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 14 of 17adaptive capacity and prevent them from suffering from major disturbances due to this transition.Our findings from the application of the AC thus support results from previous research as well as therecommendations for structural change from the coal commission [10,12,58].The phase-out date of 2035–2038 suggested by the German coal commission in its final reportlays down a timeframe of 20 years to manage the coal phase-out. The commission acknowledgesthe need for measures to support the structural change in the lignite regions, suggesting measures toimprove infrastructure, research and development, and the expansion of renewable energies. In orderto finance these measures, the regions are going to receive a total amount of 40 billion € over the next20 years from the federal budget. If deployed in a sensible way, these funds can be a chance towards asustainable structural change and a just transition within the regions. Therefore, the commission’srecommendations need to be swiftly transposed into federal law, as scheduled, in order to createplanning certainty for the regions and prevent them from maladaptation to dysfunctional circumstances.In order to allocate the funds and measures efficiently in the Structural Enhancement Act, the differencesbetween the two regions should be considered, keeping in mind the increased difficulties that Lusatiafaces compared to the Rhineland. Among the most important measures, especially in the structurallyweak region of Lusatia, are the expansion of digital and transportation infrastructure as well as thepromotion of research and development and the improvement of soft location factors. In both regions,structural support should be deployed towards the fostering of innovation in order to be as adaptableas possible and well equipped to handle future disturbances.While this study has shown that the AC can be successfully applied to the regional economies ofthe Rhineland and Lusatia, the comparability between the economic resilience of both regions is stilllimited. The regional economy of Lusatia was largely influenced by the economy of the GDR that itwas a part of. To some extent, the GDR history continues to have an effect on the region even today.In the AC, larger scales of time and space influence smaller ones and vice versa [7]. The economy ofthe GDR appears overall much less resilient than that of the Federal Republic. While the AC can serveas a tool to analyze and compare other coal regions around the world in further research, our policyrecommendations for the Rhineland and Lusatia cannot be transferred one-to-one to other coal regionsdue to the important role of each region’s individual history. Furthermore, not all aspects that make upthe complexity of the regional economies and their transition could be considered, encouraging furtherresearch to investigate more factors that may affect a region’s adaptive capacity.Further limitations arise from the nature of the AC itself. The deterministic sequence of thefour phases poses the question of whether the model is fully applicable to all systems includinghuman foresight, such as regional economies. Holling and Gunderson [30] have attended to thisquestion, but found no human system that could serve as an exception to the AC. Still, some studieschoose to interpret the AC in a less deterministic way. Slight et al. [31] allow for the possibilityof a system in the conservation phase to return directly to the exploitation phase by increasing itsresilience. Salvia and Quaranta [27] address this issue by actively involving stakeholders in determiningthe phases of the adaptive cycle. Peter and Swilling [21] develop a new, probabilistic approach tosustainability transitions that synthesizes characteristics of the AC, the MLP, and related theories in acomplexity framework.Complementing existing literature on the topic, the AC offers a new perspective on the debatesurrounding the coal phase-out in Germany looking back at the development of the lignite regionssince the end of World War II and the upcoming phase-out within 20 years. Holistic approaches likethe AC might even help reconcile the hardened fronts in this heated debate, since they view the ligniteindustry within the context of a larger system. Although most studies on structural change in theGerman lignite mining regions do not explicitly investigate or mention resilience, it is a concept whichis crucial to the matter and which constantly resonates in the background. Now it is the turn of policymakers and stakeholders in the lignite regions and on the federal level to shape a sustainable future inthe Rhineland and Lusatia and to build lasting adaptive capacity.Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 15 of 17Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.S.; Methodology, N.S. and P.W.; Formal analysis, N.S.; Resources,N.S. and P.W.; Writing—original draft preparation, N.S.; Writing—review and editing, N.S., P.W., O.S. and P.-Y.O.;Supervision, O.S. and P.-Y.O.Funding: This work was supported by the German Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF) under grantnumber 01LN1704A for the research group CoalExit. We acknowledge support by the German Research Foundationand the Open Access Publication Fund of TU Berlin.Acknowledgments: We thank Christian Hauenstein, Felipe Corral Montoya, and Felix Wejda for useful discussionsand suggestions.Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of thestudy; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision topublish the results.References1. Spencer, T.; Colombier, M.; Sartor, O.; Garg, A.; Tiwari, V.; Burton, J.; Caetano, T.; Green, F.; Teng, F.;Wiseman, J. The 1.5 ◦C target and coal sector transition: At the limits of societal feasibility. Clim. Policy 2018,18, 335–351. [CrossRef]2. Newell, P.; Mulvaney, D. The political economy of the ‘just transition’: The political economy of the ‘justtransition’. Geogr. J. 2013, 179, 132–140. [CrossRef]3. Stevis, D.; Felli, R. Global labour unions and just transition to a green economy. Int. Environ. Agreem. PoliticsLaw Econ. 2015, 15, 29–43. [CrossRef]4. Bennett, N.J.; Blythe, J.; Cisneros-Montemayor, A.M.; Singh, G.G.; Sumaila, U.R. Just Transformations toSustainability. Sustainability 2019, 11, 3881. [CrossRef]5. Bottazzi, P. Work and Social-Ecological Transitions: A Critical Review of Five Contrasting Approaches.Sustainability 2019, 11, 3852. [CrossRef]6. Holling, C.S. Understanding the Complexity of Economic, Ecological, and Social Systems. Ecosystems 2001, 4,390–405. [CrossRef]7. Simmie, J.; Martin, R. The economic resilience of regions: Towards an evolutionary approach. Camb. J. Reg.Econ. Soc. 2010, 3, 27–43. [CrossRef]8. Courvisanos, J.; Jain, A.; Mardaneh, K.K. Economic Resilience of Regions under Crises: A Study of theAustralian Economy. Reg. Stud. 2016, 50, 629–643. [CrossRef]9. Setton, D.; Matuschke, I.; Renn, O. Soziales Nachhaltigkeitsbarometer der Energiewende 2017; Institute forAdvanced Sustainability Studies (IASS): Potsdam, Germany, 2017.10. Kommission “Wachstum, Strukturwandel und Beschäftigung”; Abschlussbericht; Bundesministerium fürWirtschaft und Energie (BMWi): Berlin, Germany, 2019.11. Climate Analytics. Science Based Coal Phase-out Pathway for GERMANY in Line with the Paris Agreement1.5 ◦C Warming Limit: Opportunities and Benefits of an Accelerated Energy Transition; Climate Analytics: Berlin,Germany, 2018.12. Caldecott, B.; Sartor, O.; Spencer, T. Lessons from Previous ‘Coal Transitions’—High-Level Summary forDecision-Makers; Part of ‘Coal Transitions: Research and Dialogue on the Future of Coal’ Project; IDDRI andClimate Strategies: Paris, France; London, UK, 2017.13. Oei, P.-Y.; Brauers, H.; Herpich, P. Lessons from Germany’s Hard Coal Mining Phase-out: Policies andTransition from 1950 to 2018. Clim. Policy 2019.14. Hospers, G.-J. Restructuring Europe’s Rustbelt. Intereconomics 2004, 39, 147–156. [CrossRef]15. Campbell, S.; Coenen, L. Transitioning Beyond Coal: Lessons from the Structural Renewal of Europe’s Old IndustrialRegions; CCEP Working Papers from Centre for Climate Economics & Policy, Crawford School of PublicPolicy; The Australian National University: Canberra, Australia, 2017.16. Pierson, P. Increasing Returns, Path Dependence, and the Study of Politics. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 2000, 94,251–267. [CrossRef]17. Mahoney, J. Path Dependence in Historical Sociology. Theory Soc. 2000, 29, 507–548. [CrossRef]18. Unruh, G.C. Understanding carbon lock-in. Energy Policy 2000, 28, 817–830. [CrossRef]19. Healy, N.; Barry, J. Politicizing energy justice and energy system transitions: Fossil fuel divestment and a“just transition”. Energy Policy 2017, 108, 451–459. [CrossRef]Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 16 of 1720. Foxon, T.J.; Reed, M.S.; Stringer, L.C. Governing long-term social-ecological change: What can the adaptivemanagement and transition management approaches learn from each other? Environ. Policy Gov. 2009, 19,3–20. [CrossRef]21. Peter, C.; Swilling, M. Linking Complexity and Sustainability Theories: Implications for ModelingSustainability Transitions. Sustainability 2014, 6, 1594–1622. [CrossRef]22. Berlo, K.; Wagner, O.; Heenen, M. The Incumbents’ Conservation Strategies in the German Energy Regime asan Impediment to Re-Municipalization—An Analysis Guided by the Multi-Level Perspective. Sustainability2016, 9, 53. [CrossRef]23. Vögele, S.; Kunz, P.; Rübbelke, D.; Stahlke, T. Transformation pathways of phasing out coal-fired powerplants in Germany. Energy Sustain. Soc. 2018, 8, 25. [CrossRef]24. Leipprand, A.; Flachsland, C. Regime destabilization in energy transitions: The German debate on the futureof coal. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2018, 40, 190–204. [CrossRef]25. Geels, F.W. Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration processes: A multi-level perspectiveand a case-study. Res. Policy 2002, 31, 1257–1274. [CrossRef]26. Boschma, R. Towards an Evolutionary Perspective on Regional Resilience. Reg. Stud. 2015, 49, 733–751.[CrossRef]27. Salvia, R.; Quaranta, G. Adaptive Cycle as a Tool to Select Resilient Patterns of Rural Development.Sustainability 2015, 7, 11114–11138. [CrossRef]28. Salvia, R.; Quaranta, G. Place-Based Rural Development and Resilience: A Lesson from a Small Community.Sustainability 2017, 9, 889. [CrossRef]29. Fath, B.D.; Dean, C.A.; Katzmair, H. Navigating the adaptive cycle: An approach to managing the resilienceof social systems. Ecol. Soc. 2015, 20. [CrossRef]30. Holling, C.S.; Gunderson, L.H. Resilience and Adaptive Cycles. In Panarchy: Understanding Transformations inHuman and Natural Systems; Gunderson, L.H., Holling, C.S., Eds.; Island Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2002.31. Slight, P.; Adams, M.; Sherren, K. Policy support for rural economic development based on Holling’secological concept of panarchy. Int. J. Sustain. Dev. World Ecol. 2016, 23, 1–14. [CrossRef]32. Rogov, M.; Rozenblat, C. Urban Resilience Discourse Analysis: Towards a Multi-Level Approach to Cities.Sustainability 2018, 10, 4431. [CrossRef]33. Cherp, A.; Vinichenko, V.; Jewell, J.; Brutschin, E.; Sovacool, B. Integrating techno-economic, socio-technicaland political perspectives on national energy transitions: A meta-theoretical framework. Energy Res. Soc. Sci.2018, 37, 175–190. [CrossRef]34. Statistik der Kohlenwirtschaft. Anzahl der Beschäftigten im Braunkohlenbergbau im Rheinland von 1930 bis2018. Available online: https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/161198/umfrage/braunkohlenbergbau-beschaeftigte-im-rheinland-seit-1930/ (accessed on 3 February 2018).35. Statistik der Kohlenwirtschaft. Braunkohlenförderung in der Lausitz von 1950 bis 2018 (in 1.000 Tonnen).Available online: https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/160043/umfrage/braunkohlenfoerderung-in-der-lausitz-seit-1950/ (accessed on 23 January 2019).36. Statistik der Kohlenwirtschaft. Anzahl der Beschäftigten im Braunkohlenbergbau in der Lausitz in denJahren von 1960 bis 2018. Available online: https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/161205/umfrage/braunkohlenbergbau-beschaeftigte-in-der-lausitz-seit-1960/ (accessed on 3 February 2018).37. Statistik der Kohlenwirtschaft. Braunkohlenförderung im Rheinland von 1950 bis 2018 (in 1.000 Tonnen).Available online: https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/160027/umfrage/braunkohlenfoerderung-im-rheinland-seit-1950/ (accessed on 23 January 2019).38. Awan, L.; Dalg, P.; Lehmann, H.; Meidinger, D. Deutschland im Funkloch; Tagesspiegel: Berlin, Germany, 2019.39. Allianz pro Schiene. Erreichbarkeit von Bus und Bahn auf Basis von Bundesinstitut für Bau- Stadt- undRaumforschung (BBSR); Allianz pro Schiene: Berlin, Germany, 2019.40. Allianz pro Schiene. Erreichbarkeit von Bus und Bahn in Deutschland auf Basis von Bundesinstitut für Bau- Stadt-und Raumforschung (BBSR); Allianz pro Schiene: Berlin, Germany, 2019.41. Statistische Ämter des Bundes und der Länder. Arbeitslose nach ausgewählten Personengruppen sowieArbeitslosenquoten–Jahresdurchschnitt–regionale Tiefe: Kreise und krfr. Städte. Arbeitsmarktstatistik derBundesagentur für Arbeit. Available online: https://www.regionalstatistik.de/ (accessed on 17 April 2019).42. Statistische Ämter des Bundes und der Länder. Bevölkerung nach Geschlecht–Stichtag 31.12.–regionale Tiefe:Kreise und krfr. Städte. Available online: https://www.regionalstatistik.de/ (accessed on 18 October 2019).Sustainability 2019, 11, 5991 17 of 1743. RWI. Erarbeitung aktueller vergleichender Strukturdaten für die deutschen Braunkohleregionen;RWI—Leibniz-Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung: Essen, Germany, 2018.44. Eurostat. Patent Applications to the EPO by Priority Year by NUTS 3 Regions. Available online: http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=pat_ep_rtot (accessed on 17 April 2019).45. Räth, N. Rezessionen in historischer Betrachtung. In Wirtschaft und Statistik 3; Statistisches Bundesamt, Ed.;Statistisches Bundesamt: Wiesbaden, Germany, 2009.46. Seibert, H.; Weyh, A.; Jost, O.; Sujata, U.; Wiethölter, D.; Carstensen, J. Die Lausitz. Eine Region imWandel; IAB-Regional. IAB Berlin-Brandenburg 3/2018; Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung derBundesagentur für Arbeit: Nürnberg, Germany, 2018.47. Eurostat. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at Current Market Prices by NUTS 3 Regions. Available online:http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=nama_10r_3gdp (accessed on 20 October 2019).48. Müller, K. Heimat, Kohle, Umwelt. Argumente im Protest und der Befürwortung von Braunkohleförderung in derLausitz; Zeitschrift für Umweltpolitik & Umweltrecht (ZfU): Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 2017; pp. 213–228.49. Regionalverband Ruhr. Statistikportal Ruhr. Available online: https://www.rvr.ruhr/daten-digitales/regionalstatistik/statistikportal-ruhr/ (accessed on 20 October 2019).