Incorporating Economic Resilience Metrics into INDOT’s Transportation Decision-Making

  JOINT TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH PROGRAM INDIANA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND PURDUE UNIVERSITY Incorporating Economic Resilience Metrics into INDOT’s Transportation Decision-Making Yue Ke, Lisa Lorena Losada-Rojas, Davis Chacon-Hurtado, Konstantina Gkritza, Jon D. Fricker SPR-4162 • Report Number: FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04 • DOI: 10.5703/1288284317115 RECOMMENDED CITATIONKe, Y., Losada-Rojas, L. L., Chacon-Hurtado, D., Gkritza, K., & Fricker, J. D. (2020). Incorporating economic resilience metrics into INDOT’s transportation decision-making (Joint Transportation Research Program Report No. FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04). West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University. https://doi.org/10.5703/1288284317115AUTHORSYue Ke Lisa Lorena Losada-Rojas Davis Chacon-Hurtado Graduate Research AssistantsLyles School of Civil EngineeringPurdue University Konstantina Gkritza, PhDProfessor of Civil EngineeringLyles School of Civil EngineeringPurdue University (317) 275-6810nadia@purdue.eduCorresponding AuthorJon D. Fricker, PhDProfessor of Civil EngineeringLyles School of Civil EngineeringPurdue University(765) 494-2205fricker@purdue.eduCorresponding AuthorJOINT TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH PROGRAMThe Joint Transportation Research Program serves as a vehicle for INDOT collaboration with higher education in-stitutions and industry in Indiana to facilitate innovation that results in continuous improvement in the planning, design, construction, operation, management and economic efficiency of the Indiana transportation infrastructure. https://engineering.purdue.edu/JTRP/index_htmlPublished reports of the Joint Transportation Research Program are available at http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/jtrp/.NOTICEThe contents of this report reflect the views of the authors, who are responsible for the facts and the accuracy of the data presented herein. The contents do not necessarily reflect the official views and policies of the Indiana Depart-ment of Transportation or the Federal Highway Administration. The report does not constitute a standard, specifica-tion or regulation.1. Report No. 2.  Government Accession No. 3.  Recipient’s Catalog No.FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/044. Title and Subtitle 5. Report DateIncorporating Economic Resilience Metrics into INDOT’s Transportation Decision-  January 2020 Making 6.  Performing Organization Code7. Author(s) 8.  Performing Organization Report No. Yue Ke, Lisa Lorena Losada Rojas, Davis Chacon-Hurtado, Konstantina Gkritza, FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04and Jon D. Fricker 9.  Performing Organization Name and Address 10. Work Unit No. Joint Transportation Research Program (SPR)Hall for Discovery and Learning Research (DLR), Suite 204 11.  Contract or Grant No.207 S. Martin Jischke Drive SPR-4162 West Lafayette, IN 47907 12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 13.  Type of Report and Period Covered Indiana Department of Transportation Final Report State Office Building 14. Sponsoring Agency Code100 North Senate AvenueIndianapolis, IN 46204 15. Supplementary Notes Conducted in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.16. Abstract The 2007 Great Recession is widely considered  the worst economic downturn in  recent  United States History. In Indiana, the unemployment  rate  reached  10.6%, and took  nearly seven years to return to pre-recession levels. However, employment data from this period shows  that the change in total employment at the  county  level ranged from -20% to +5%, indicating that while many counties suffered from high unemployment, other counties experienced gains in total employment. Various research efforts, including this  project, have been undertaken to understand the local characteristics  that influence the differing degrees to which regional/city economies were  able to resist or cope  with the effects of the recession.  In the  literature, this ability is referred to as regional economic resilience (RER). This research project’s primary objective is to develop a framework and tool  that could be used by  INDOT’s Asset Planning & Management  Division and Indiana metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) to evaluate the role of transportation accessibility  in building RER of Indiana’s regions to economic shocks. The following  tasks were undertaken:  the development of a resilience index to inform stakeholders of  the comparative RERs  in Indiana; the estimation of an econometric model to evaluate the association between Indiana counties’  regional characteristics and the resilience index; the development of a framework in which  results of previous tasks can be incorporated into transportation decision-making at the sketch level by MPOs, regionaldevelopment organizations, and  other similar agencies;  and design of a tool  to allow planners to examine the potential changes to  RER  due to policies or other  exogenous  shocks.17. Key Words 18. Distribution Statement economic resilience; expert opinion; structural equation model; No restrictions. This document is available through thesketch-planning; policy National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA22161. 19.  Security Classif. (of this report) 20.  Security Classif. (of this page) 21. No. of Pages 22. PriceUnclassified Unclassified 50 including appendices  Form DOT  F 1700.7 (8-72) Reproduction of completed page authorized TECHNICAL REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE EXECUTIVE SUMMARYIntroductionThe 2007 Great Recession is widely considered the worsteconomic downturn in recent United States history. In Indiana,the unemployment rate reached 10.6% and took nearly sevenyears to return to pre-recession levels. However, employment datafrom this period shows that the change in total employment at thecounty level ranged from -20% to +5%, indicating that while manycounties suffered from high unemployment, other counties exp-erienced gains in total employment. Various research efforts, inclu-ding this project, have been undertaken to understand the localcharacteristics that influence the differing degrees to which regional/city economies were able to resist or cope with the effects of therecession. In the literature, this ability is referred to as regionaleconomic resilience (RER).This research project’s primary objective was to develop aframework and tool that could be used by INDOT’s Asset Plan-ning and Management Division and Indiana metropolitan plan-ning organizations (MPOs) to evaluate the role of transportationaccessibility in strengthening the capacity of regions in Indiana inresisting economic shocks. The following tasks were undertaken:N the development of a resilience index to inform stakeholdersof the comparative RERs in Indiana;N the estimation of an econometric model to evaluate theassociation between Indiana counties’ regional characteris-tics and the resilience index;N the development of a framework in which results of previoustasks can be incorporated into transportation decision-making at the sketch level by MPOs, regional developmentorganizations, and other similar agencies; andN the design of a tool to allow planners to examine the potentialchanges to RER due to policies or other exogenous shocks.Study FrameworkIn order to develop a resilience index, the project asked a panelof experts for their opinions on how various factors (latentvariables) influenced RER. These factors were identified via anextensive literature review process. The questionnaire responsesformed the basis of the weighting system used to calculatethe resilience index. Concurrently, an econometric model wasconstructed using data from the U.S. Census Bureau, amongothers, to determine the extent to which observed variables(e.g., population within 180 minutes) influenced the latentvariables (e.g., transportation accessibility). The results from theempirical model were then used in the development of the planningtool. The tool consists of a dashboard allowing users to compareRERs between regions, a micro-simulation component to evaluatechanges to RER at a policy level, and a macro-simulation com-ponent to evaluate changes to RER at a project’s sketch-planninglevel.Recommendations/ImplementationThe deliverables stemming from this project can be usedto help inform policy makers and transportation plannersat the metropolitan, county/regional, and state levels withempirically driven predictions of how potential projects willaffect RER. Stakeholders can use this information to developmore robust benefit cost analyses to evaluate potential projectsor policy interventions as part of a multiple criteria decision-making process. Furthermore, because of the multitude of factorsincorporated within the RER estimator spreadsheet tool, poten-tial projects are not limited to solely traditional transportationprojects such as improvements to highway infrastructure orincreasing labor market access. Another potential use of the toolis to evaluate the impact of multiple interventions simultaneouslyon RER.CONTENTS1. INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11.1 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11.2 Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11.3 Anticipated Benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11.4 Organization of the Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12. LITERATURE REVIEW AND BACKGROUND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22.1 Concept of Economic Resilience (ER) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22.2 Paradigms of Economic Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22.3 Previous Studies on Economic Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22.4 Characterization of Regional Economic Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32.5 Developing a Metric of Regional Economic Resilience. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.6 Components of Regional Economic Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53. DATA AND METHODS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.2 Soliciting Experts’ Opinions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.3 Modeling Interdependencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94. TOOL DEVELOPMENT AND DESCRIPTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174.1 Tool Development Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174.2 Tool Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174.3 Dashboard. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175. TOOL IMPLEMENTATION AND USE CASE EXAMPLE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215.1 Use Case Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216. DISCUSSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256.1 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256.2 Implementation Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26APPENDICESAppendix A. Survey Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30Appendix B. SEM Results (2000 Values) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30Appendix C. Glossary of Terms Used in The Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30LIST OF TABLESTable PageTable 2.1 Economic Resilience Approaches 4Table 3.1 Summary of Decision-Making Techniques 12Table 3.2 Values of the Random Index (RI) for Small Problems 12Table 3.3 AHP Results 13Table 3.4 Description of Variables (2016 values) 15Table 3.5 Post-Recession Period SEM Results 16LIST OF FIGURESFigure PageFigure 2.1 Triangle of resilience 5Figure 2.2 Components of regional economic resilience 6Figure 3.1 Process to identify the relationship between transportation and RER 9Figure 3.2 Types of organizations where respondents work 10Figure 3.3 Respondents’ role in the decision-making process for transportation projects 10Figure 3.4 Respondents’ years of work experience 10Figure 3.5 Familiarity with the concept of RER 11Figure 3.6 Familiarity with the concept of RER among different organizations 11Figure 3.7 Extent to which each of the components affect ER 11Figure 3.8 Results of AHP 13Figure 3.9 Structural equation model 14Figure 4.1 Tool development framework as applied to transportation accessibility 18Figure 4.2 Tool dashboard 18Figure 4.3 MicroTool module, transportation accessibility component 19Figure 4.4 MicroTool module, results component 20Figure 4.5 MacroTool module 21Figure 5.1 Use case example—dashboard 22Figure 5.2 Use case example—MicroTool_Transpo Sheet 22Figure 5.3 Use case example—MicroTool_HumanK Sheet 23Figure 5.4 Use case example—MicroTool_Industry 23Figure 5.5 Use case example—MicroTool_EconH 24Figure 5.6 Use case example—MicroTool Results 24Figure 5.7 Use case example—MacroTool 251. INTRODUCTION1.1 MotivationThe 2007 recession is considered the worst economicdownturn in post-war United States (U.S.) history(Elsby et al., 2010). For Indiana, it meant a statewideaverage unemployment rate as high as 10.6% (June2009) and took approximately seven years (i.e., July2014) to recover from (Kinghorn, 2015). Althoughthe study of economic fluctuations has a long history(Martin et al., 2016), their potential negative effects arealways relevant as scholars have noted that the U.S. hasundergone at least one official recession or depressionevery decade (Johnson, 2013). In addition, the literaturepoints out that the effects of recessions are not equallydistributed across socio-economic groups or geographi-cal regions. In Indiana, employment data from the2007–2009 Great Recession shows that the change intotal employment at the county level ranged from -20%to +5% (between 2007 and 2009). Because the aggre-gated state trends in employment are simply a reflectionof the capacity of local and regional economies to resistand recover from the effects of recessions (Martin et al.,2016), various research efforts have been undertaken tounderstand the local characteristics that influence theaggregated regional resilience capacity of urban andregional economies. The regional/city economies thatwere able to resist or cope with the effects of a recessionare labeled as ‘‘resilient,’’ a term that has become anideal objective for policy making and planning, just assustainability or social justice. For that reason, thereis also a significant body of research conceptualizingregional resilience. The wide body of literature on theconcept and factors of resilience, however, presents littleevidence of the role that infrastructure systems, parti-cularly transportation infrastructure, play in buildingmore resilient regions.1.2 ObjectivesIn view of the above, this study aims to understandthe most important regional factors that influenced thespatial distribution of the recession’s effects in Indianawith a special attention on transportation infrastruc-ture. Specifically, the objective of this project is todevelop a framework and tool that could be used by theINDOT’s Asset Planning and Management Divisionand Indiana Metropolitan Planning Organizationsto evaluate the role of transportation accessibility instrengthening the capacity of regions in Indiana inresisting economic shocks. The specific tasks are asfollows:1. Develop a resilience index to better inform stakeholdersof the comparative RER in Indiana with respect toplanning the implementation of potential transportationprojects.2. Develop an econometric model that can evaluate theassociation between Indiana Counties’ regional charac-teristics, including transportation accessibility, and theresilience index developed under Task 1.3. Develop a framework in which the results of the previoussteps can be incorporated into transportation decision-making at the sketch-level by Metropolitan PlanningOrganizations (MPO), Regional Development Organiza-tions (RDOS), and other similar agencies.4. Create a tool based on the framework from Task 3 toallow planners to examine the ways that changes frompolicies or other exogenous shocks may affect RER.1.3 Anticipated BenefitsThe main contribution of this study is to provide aholistic framework that can help understand the inter-relationships between transportation accessibility andRER to economic shocks. In practical terms, the pro-posed framework will be reflected in an index thatcould be incorporated into the decision-making processof transportation project investments in Indiana.Additionally, the proposed index can enhance INDOT’stransportation decision-making and can be also used asmeans of communication among the different stake-holders such as elected officials and general public.The spreadsheet tool can be used to perform what-ifscenario analyses by estimating the potential effects ofimprovements in the transportation network to theRER of Indiana. Further, the results of the tool couldbe included as a complement of other project assess-ment processes such as multi-criteria analysis andbenefit cost analysis. Moreover, it could also be usedin activities of the Highway Research and Develop-ment program of the FAST Act such as ‘‘activities tostrengthen transportation planning and environmentaldecision-making’’ and ‘‘activities to reduce congestion,improve highway operations, and enhance freight pro-ductivity’’ (FHWA, 2015, p. 36).1.4 Organization of the ReportChapter 2 provides an overview of the term ‘‘economicresilience (ER) and regional ER’’ and explains how thisconcept has been formalized and measured in thisstudy. Chapter 2 also defines the regional charac-teristics associated with RER and how they can bemeasured through proxy variables. Chapter 3 presentsa two-step approach examining whether regional resi-lience to economic shocks is associated with transpor-tation infrastructure. The first step is based on an expertopinion survey, where questions about the interdepen-dency across regional economic characteristics wereasked. The second step is based on a structural equa-tion model (SEM), where the association between thecomponents of resilience and the indicators of RERwas assessed. Chapter 4 presents the tool developmentframework and describes the tool’s modules as wellas their functionality and purpose. Lastly, Chapter 5presents a hypothetical use case to illustrate how thetool’s outputs can be incorporated in project decision-making in Indiana and outlines the study conclusions.Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04 12. LITERATURE REVIEW AND BACKGROUND2.1 Concept of Economic Resilience (ER)According to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, thefirst known use of the term ‘‘resilience’’ was in 1807while the first use of the term ‘‘resilient’’ was in 1674.The same dictionary defines resilience as the ‘‘[capabi-lity] of withstanding shock without permanent defor-mation or rupture.’’ Research associated with ‘‘resilience’’could be traced back for many decades in the fields ofphysics and psychology. The explicit definition of thenotion of resilience in physiology dates back to the 1970’s(Vernon, 2004). This definition was associated with suc-cessful adaptation of children to adverse events and thedevelopment of psychopathologies (Reich et al., 2010).On the other hand, the definitions of resilience couldbe traced back to studies in the field of Ecology with thework of Holling (1973) and Pimm (1984). Holing statesthat the behavior of ecological systems could be definedby two properties. First, resilience, that is associatedwith the persistence of relationships (i.e., functionality)within the system. Second, stability, which is associatedthe capacity of a system to return to an equilibrium stateafter a temporary disturbance occurs. Pimm (1984) defi-ned resilience as ‘‘how fast the variables return towardtheir equilibrium following a perturbation.’’ He defineda system as stable ‘‘if and only if the variables all returnto the initial equilibrium […]’’ (Pimm, 1984, p. 322).Pimm’s definition of resilience was later denominated as‘‘engineering resilience’’ by Holling in 1996 (Folke et al.,2010) to differentiate it from the term ‘‘ecological resi-lience’’ (Walker et al., 2004, as cited in Gunderson et al.,2012). More recently, in order to incorporate the role ofhuman actions as an integral part of the systems (i.e.,not as an external agent), the term social-ecologicalresilience was coined. Social-ecological resilience con-siders people and nature as interdependent (or coupled)systems (Folke et al., 2010), and include the notion ofadaptability and transformability as key ingredients orparts of resilience.2.2 Paradigms of Economic ResilienceMost of the research on ER can be grouped underthree main paradigms (Boschma, 2015). These are: thesingle equilibrium resilience (engineering resilience), multi-equilibrium resilience (ecological resilience), andthe social-ecological resilience (adaptive or evolutionaryresilience) (Boschma, 2015; Pendall et al., 2010). Social-ecological systems embed concepts of complex adaptivesystems or what is also called evolutionary paradigm. Inthat paradigm, the role of humans, particularly in adap-ting to new situations, is considered. Pendall et al. (2010)presented a taxonomy of the study of resilience wheredifferent study efforts can be grouped based on thenature of shock (i.e., challenge or time dimension) andthe resilience lens used. An adapted version of this taxo-nomy is shown in Table 2.1. Note that under social-ecological resilience, no explicit equilibrium is defined.2.3 Previous Studies on Economic ResilienceThe following section aims to provide an overview ofthe methods and measurements of RER that are ofinterest to the scope of this report. In that view, it doesnot intend to discuss macro or micro economic modelsfrom the literature of ER.Han and Goetz (2015) studied the changes in employ-ment of U.S. counties during the Great Recession byadopting the notion of absorption and recovery fromeconomic shocks. Those authors developed a drop indexand a rebound index using employment and calculateresilience as the sum of drop and rebound indices. Hanand Goetz (2015) found that each county respondeddifferently to the shock, not only in terms of magnitude,but also in terms of the time when the region was mostlyaffected. A similar study by Faggian et al. (2018) deve-loped a multinomial model where four categories ofregions were created. These categories were based on the‘‘resistance’’ and ‘‘recovery’’ capacity of each region. Theresistance capacity describes the employment changeduring Italy’s recession in the region relative to thenational change before and during the recession. Therecovery capacity represents the change in employmentafter the recession. Each region represented a LocalLabor Systems (LLS) in Italy. That study found thatindustrial vocation, population, tourism, and location indistricts focused on food and textile sectors were rele-vant in determining the resilience of regions. They alsofound that medium-size regions were more likely tosimultaneously be more resistant and able to recoverfaster.Fingleton et al. (2012) examined the resilience of 12U.K. regions to four recessionary shocks focusing on boththe engineering and ecological resilience. That studycompared ‘‘engineering and plucking’’ with ‘‘ecologicaland hysteresis.’’ In the former, the economic shocks havea temporal effect on the long run economic or employ-ment growth. After this period, the previous path ofgrowth is resumed (i.e., rebound to a previous equili-brium). In the latter, a disturbance permanently affectsthe path of the economy in a region (i.e., memory of thedisturbance) (Martin et al., 2016). These authors usedrestricted and unrestricted seemingly unrelated regres-sions models for engineering resilience and a vector error-correction model specification for ecological resilience.They found that U.K. regions are different mostly inthe magnitude of the initial disruption because of theeconomic shock, while they did not differ much in theirspeed of recovery. Similarly, they found that shockstypically have permanent effects on the employment of aregion and its neighboring regions.Jung (2015) studied the impacts of entrepreneurshipon ER using a panel and quasi-experimental analyseswith the aim to provide evidence of the importantfactors in ER and show evidence of causality betweenentrepreneurship and resilience. They analyzed the periodbetween 2000 and 2012 and focused on the 2007 recessionas well as Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The indicatorof resilience in that study was based on annual growth2 Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04rates of income per capita, employment, and popula-tion. Their explanatory variables included number ofemployees, capital stock, human capital, patents, indus-trial diversity, migration, firm density, federal funding,most affected region dummies, and federal assistantprograms. That study found that entrepreneurship posi-tively affects economic recovery of recessions in termsof population and employment growth. A similar trendwas found for agglomeration, industrial diversity, patents,physical capital stock, and federal funding. However,employment resilience was negatively associated withper capita income growth. Similarly, the density offirms was negatively associated with employment. Thiswas explained by the possibility that excessive competi-tion in crowded markets can affect the rate of employ-ment growth.Davies (2011) studied the RER in European regionsusing unemployment rates as an indicator of regionalresilience. That study used indicators of economic strengthand fragility (such as GDP per capita), a measure of labormarket functioning based on unemployment rate in 2007,and an indicator of agglomeration based on popula-tion density in 2005. That author used a linear regressionmodel to investigate how these variables and resiliencewere associated. That study found that the correlationsbetween economic strength and resilience varied acrosscountries and that manufacturing regions were lessresilient.Kreston and Wojcik (2013) investigated the resilienceof metropolitan areas in the U.S. and found that for therecession period, the size, specialization, and high den-sity of subprime mortgages had harmful effects onmetropolitan resilience. On the other hand, financial con-centration and income demonstrated positive effects.More recently, Angulo et al. (2018) went one step furtherand examined how the economic structure of Spanishprovinces changed (or adapted) after the 2008 economicshock, using two shift-share analyses for four industries(service, construction, industry, and agriculture). Usingdata between 2001 and 2015, they found that the Spanishprovinces with sectorial and locational advantages beforethe shock or advantages in location after the shock havebetter performance (i.e., lower drop in employmentgrowth). They also found that areas that specialized inservice industries (based on location quotients) werelikely to have better performance. On the other hand, theopposite was found for areas that specialized in theconstruction industry. Other relevant studies includeBrown and Greenbaum (2017), who investigated indus-trial diversity in regional resilience using unemploymentas an indicator and Courvisanos et al. (2016), whostudied the adaptive capacity of Australian regions.While these studies provided insightful results on theeconomic behavior of the different regions under study,they did not consider specific transportation-relatedfactors or broad regional characteristics (e.g., livabil-ity); both of these factors could have contributedto their regional performance during or after the econo-mic shock. Moreover, some studies only looked at theeconomic behavior of the indicator. For instance, in Hanand Goetz (2015), no additional information from thecounties was considered to explain which variables orcharacteristics could be associated with the gaps in timeand space found for the resilience index. Also, some ofthese studies (Han & Goetz, 2015; Faggian et al., 2018;Davies, 2011; Kreston & Wojcik, 2013) did not considerthe spatial interaction or spillover effects between regions.On the other hand, the work of Fingleton et al. (2012)and Angulo et al. (2018) considered the time dimensionand interregional employment linkages; however, othervariables that are relevant to regional resilience (such asthose outlined in Renschler et al., 2010), were not consi-dered. Finally, none of these studies considered vari-ables that describe the transportation geography of thestudied areas.2.4 Characterization of Regional Economic ResilienceThe multi-dimensionality of RER is identifiable dueto the different frameworks and wide heterogeneity inresponses that could be found from different regionsand industries. Although different authors proposeddifferent components of resilience with diverse names,the common underlying principles such as resistance,recovery, and transformation can be found. Some authorsexplicitly differentiate across the time dimensions ofresilience.The most widely used representation of resilience isbased on the ‘‘resilience triangle,’’ (see Figure 2.1) inwhich the y-axis represents the level of ‘‘functionality’’of the system and the x-axis represents the time beforeand after the disruption. With this type of event-drivenmeasure of resilience, the y-axis (functionality) couldrepresent employment levels (Han & Goetz, 2015),number of trips (Cox et al., 2011), or economic output(Vugrin et al., 2010), among others. Typically, resilienceis a measure of the relationship between the system’sfunctionality after the shock and the potential worst-case scenario (i.e., no resilience in the system). Simi-larly, Rose (2007) presents a framework where therobustness (i.e., static resilience) is defined as the ratio ofthe ‘‘avoided drop’’ of the system to the worst possibledrop. Further, the recovery capacity (dynamic resili-ence) is calculated by comparing the system output withand without recovery efforts for different time periodsor ‘‘time steps.’’ The recovery period is the sum of thisdifference in all periods or steps (Vugrin et al., 2010).For robustness capacity, Rose (2007) defines a meas-urement of direct static resilience and one of total staticresilience. The former applies to firms or industries andis referred to as economic ‘‘partial equilibrium’’ analy-sis. The latter deals with macroeconomic analysis whichincludes all prices and quantity interactions and its ana-lysis forms part of the economic ‘‘general equilibriumanalysis.’’ In this framework, the robustness capacityis measured by comparing the expected performanceunder disruption with the worst-case scenario in caseany resilience is present (i.e., total loss capacity). InJoint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04 3Figure 2.1, this percentage avoidance of the worst-casescenario is defined by B divided by A or by (A-B)/A.Similarly, the dynamic resilience is defined as the diffe-rence between the lines C and D, which represent thelevel of economic activity with and without hastenedrecovery (Rose, 2007; Vugrin et al., 2010). This could bealso represented as continued trigonometric, linear, orexponential functions (Cimellaro et al., 2010).Another study using this approach is Han and Goetz(2015). Those authors provided a resilience index basedon an employment time series that are used to identifythe peak and trough points that mark the ‘‘Drop’’(robustness) and the ‘‘Rebound’’ (recovery) of the eco-nomy, respectively. Drop is the decline in employmentuntil the valley point is reached, and the rebound is therate of recovery in employment after the lowest pointhas been reached.In addition to the resilience triangle (see Figure 2.1),Francis and Bekera (as cited in Bond et al., 2017)presented an approach in which the absorptive, adap-tive, and recovery components are taken into considera-tion explicitly. Francis and Bekera improve the Norriset al. (2008) framework by incorporating stakeholders’engagement and the setting of resilience objectives aspart of their framework (Bond et al., 2017).Other authors present frameworks where input-output (I/O) tables or general equilibrium models(GEM) are used. For instance, Martinelli et al., (2014)present a model considering the economic effects andcharacteristics that could be used to predict the impactsof natural disasters in monetary terms. That modelemphasizes the economic interdependencies that existsbetween industries and lifelines. The authors present amodified version of the HAZUS model from FederalEmergency Management Agency (FEMA). Martinelliet al. (2014) compute the direct losses from the disaster,considering buildings and lifelines. The indirect lossesare calculated using a GEM (instead of I/O tables) andthen a reliability index is calculated. Similarly, Rose andLiao (2005) presented a computable general equilibriumapproach (CGE) in which the CGE models wereadapted to account for the effects of major disruptionsof critical inputs and then applied the framework to acase study for the evaluation of the economic impacts ofa hypothetical disruption to the water system in thePortland metropolitan area. The authors highlight thatthe main advantage of using a CGE model over othereconomic models is that it allows input substitutions asin the real world. Nevertheless, the level of complexity inusing this type of model is still a limiting factor.In addition to these studies, some frameworks weredeveloped with the intention of incorporating resilienceinto the project decision-making process. The RANDCorporation (Bond et al., 2017) presented a resilienceframework, in which the ‘‘resilience dividend’’ is quan-tified in terms of an economic value. The resiliencedividend is the difference between the resilient-builtscenario and an alternative scenario for the project suchas a do-nothing or business as usual scenario. The quan-tification of the resilience dividend includes not only thebenefits of risk reduction, but also the co-benefits thatimprove the current condition of the project and thequality of life of people. Those authors pointed out theimportance of adequately measuring these benefits.That study stated that, when analyzing and comparinga levee project with a land use planning project, thebenefits of both might be similar. However, the land useproject could bring additional externalities such as airquality, recreational areas, and other important effects.The non-quantification of these externalities could bringa bias towards the implementation of levees. FHWA(2018) synthetizes studies and lessons learned in FHWAstudies related to climate change and extreme weatherevents in order to guide their incorporation as part ofthe project development process. The economic analysisquantifies the costs and benefits of different adaptationscenarios. The analysis considers the costs of damagerepair, economic losses to local businesses, and socio-economic costs due to extreme weather events and cli-mate change. Both frameworks, however, have the issueof non-quantifiable benefits and data availability forother variables that are quantifiable.TABLE 2.1Economic Resilience Approaches (Adapted from Folke, 2006 and Pendall et al., 2010.)Paradigms‘‘Engineering’’ or single-equilibrium resilience‘‘Ecological’’ or multiple-equilibria resilienceSocial-ecological resilienceand complex adaptive systems1Focus On: Recovery and constancy Persistence and robustness Adaptive capacity transformability,learning, innovationTime Dimension(‘‘When?’’)Short term Return to pre-condition(e.g., return to previousunemployment rates aftera shock)Establishment of a newpre-condition (equilibria)(e.g., change in growth ratesafter a given shock)Continual adaptation (e.g., keeppositive or neutral performancedespite the shocks)Long term Stability of natural norms(e.g., low unemploymentrates in the long term)Performance improvement(e.g., new employment levelsor rates every period)Continual adaptation (e.g.,establishment of new growth pathsbased on new sectors/ subsectors)1While approaches related to complex adaptive systems can be seen both in the ecological and social-ecological paradigms, this study places itunder the third paradigm only.4 Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/042.5 Developing a Metric of Regional EconomicResilienceBased on the literature review of previous studies ofresilience and the metrics used to characterize resilience,a metric of RER was developed in order to reflect thelong-term influence of transportation on RER andreflect the local regional capacity of each region understudy. This economic indicator is obtained through ashift share analysis based on annual employment dataat the county level covering the period before and afterthe recession. The regional performance is calculatedannually and aggregated in a process called dynamicshift-share analysis. This metric is based on the ‘‘localcompetitiveness’’ of each region. The resulting indexreflect the resistance and recovery capacity of regionsdepending on the period under analysis. The periodmeasured by the 2000 decennial census reflects the resis-tant capacity of the region(s) while the period meas-ured by the 2016 ACS reflects the recovery capacity.Thus, the period of study includes two recessions, the8-month recession in 2001 caused by Y2K scares, andthe more recent 2007–2009 subprime mortgage-drivenGreat Recession. While these time periods are fixedfor all regions, it should be noted that the recessionfollowed different time periods for different counties inIndiana.Following the adopted definition of resilience as ‘‘thecapacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reor-ganize while undergoing change so as to still retainessentially the same function, structure, identity, andfeedback’’ (Walker et al., 2004, p. 6), the indicator ofRER considers the regional performance during twoperiods. First, it considers the period during the reces-sion, where a region could be categorized as resistant ifthe regional performance is positive. A positive regionalperformance indicates either that the region did notdecrease in its total employment or that it decreased ata lower rate than the expected national-industry mixtrends. In other words, a region with decline in employ-ment during the recession would be resistant if theregional competitiveness decreased the negative trendeffect of the recession. Second, during the rebound orrecovery period, the regional performance will indicateif the recovery is the result of national- or industry-related trends or due to the regional competitiveness.2.6 Components of Regional Economic ResilienceThe literature points out a set of urban or regionalcharacteristics that are associated with regions’ capacityto resist or recover from recessionary shocks. Thesedifferent characteristics are presented as a group of‘‘components’’ that, in conjunction, contribute to buil-ding the RER capacity of regions. This section presentsa summary of those components that were derived fromRenschler et al. (2010), Chapple and Lester, (2010),Jackson et al. (2015), Briguglio et al., (2009), andEkogen et al. (2009). The resulting set of theoreticalcomponents is presented in Figure 2.2.Although the components of resilience are shown asindependent in Figure 2.2, they could be significantlyinterrelated with each other. In addition, each compo-nent is represented by a subset of indicators that aimto characterize each component. Studies focused ongeneral resilience and disaster-related resilience presentcomprehensive lists of indicators (see for exampleRenschler et al., 2010; and Rockefeller Foundation &ARUP, 2015). Note that the focus of this study ison indicators of accessibility and transportation. Thefollowing sections describe these components as well asthe main indicators chosen to represent them.2.6.1 Human CapitalHuman capital embodies the knowledge, skills, andcompetencies of individuals that contribute to thecreation of economic well-being (Healy & Coˆte´, 2001).In that vein, higher levels of human capital are asso-ciated with higher levels of regional performance.Human capital is typically measured by indicatorsbased on education and/or share of managerial andengineering occupations in a given region. Educationnot only brings technological innovations, but alsobuilds up a workforce capable of completing complextasks. Wojan, (2014) provides empirical evidence of theassociation between resilience and human capital byexamining creative counties (as defined by a share ofFigure 2.1 Triangle of resilience. (Adapted from Rose, 2007 and Vugrin et al., 2010.)Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04 5more than 25% in creative occupations that, accordingto Wojan’s definition, included artists) during the 2007recession. That study found that creative countieswere more likely to be classified as resilient as theygained employment after losing them during the reces-sion. Among them, the metropolitan creative countieshad the higher share; nonetheless, there were alsonon-metropolitan counties that continued to grow inemployment both during and after the recession.2.6.2 Industrial DiversityThe role of industrial diversity during economicrecessions is widely recognized in the literature byscholars and practitioners. In other words, diversity inindustries should allow for more resilient behaviors.This relationship is usually explored using unemploy-ment rates and diversity indicators (such as Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI)). The findings usually show aninverse relationship between unemployment rates andindustrial diversity (Watson & Deller, 2017). For exa-mple, Izraeli and Murphy, (2003) found strong linksbetween industrial diversity and unemployment rates in17 U.S. states using data between 1960–1987 and 1988–1997, whereas Simon, (1988) found a similar trend atthe MSA level. Simon and Nardinelli, (1992) argue thatthis relationship is due to the ‘‘portfolio effect,’’ inwhich an employee that has been laid off in a decliningindustry has a higher probability of finding anotherposition in another expanding industry. In addition,Kreston and Wojcik (2013), while researching the effectof the Great Recession on U.S. metropolitan areas,found a negative association between resilience andindustry size and specialization. However, cautionshould be exercised when considering specialization asthe opposite of diversification. Duranton and Puga,(2000) argue that there is a need for both ‘‘large anddiversified’’ cities as well as ‘‘small and specialized’’cities. This, nevertheless, creates a dichotomy of res-ponses under shocks in the sectors of specializa-tion and at the regional level, making the study oftheir responses more difficult. The primary indicatorfor industry specialization used is the location quotient(LQ).2.6.3 EntrepreneurshipEntrepreneurship aims to reflect the capacity andopportunities for innovation that a region can offerfor workers and firms, which are assumed to have apositive association with resilience. Entrepreneurshipcombines existing factors of production (such as labor)in innovative ways that foster productivity (Koster,2016) and economic growth. Therefore, while the com-ponents are assumed to be independent, in practice thiscomponent could be highly correlated with humancapital. Jung (2015) specifically studied the associationand causality between regional resilience to hurricanesand economic shocks and entrepreneurship in the U.S.Gulf coast region. That study showed that employmentand population growth were positively linked to entre-preneurship. Similarly, Fairlie, (2013) studied entrepre-neurship based on the rate of business ownershipobtained from matched time series data from currentU.S. population surveys in 1996 and 2009. That authorfound that higher unemployment rates increase theprobability of individuals starting businesses. In gen-eral, recessionary periods seem to boost entrepreneur-ship by individuals who are willing to accept higherrisks of ventures as an alternative to unemployment.In the same vein, there is evidence that research anddevelopment of existing firms follows a pro-cyclicalbehavior (Koellinger & Thurik, 2012). Nonetheless, asentrepreneurship is a function of how individuals andfirms recognize opportunities and possess the motiva-tion, skills, and capacity to explore them (Cabrita et al.,2015); it is a factor difficult to measure in practice.2.6.4 LivabilityThe component of livability aims to reflect thequality of life that each place can offer. FHWA(FHWA, 2018) ties this concept to the level of accessto broader opportunities, such as good jobs, affordablehousing, quality of schools, and safer streets and roads.Similarly, the American Association of Retired Persons(AARP, n.d.) developed an index based on sevendifferent components of livability, including safe andconvenient transportation. In general, it is assumed thatlivable communities (e.g., communities with high-quality amenities) attract creative class workers andfirms (Florida, 2002) that reinforce a region’s humancapital and entrepreneurship, as well as providingopportunities to foster social capital. Evidence fromthis association was found by Glaeser and Gottlieb,(2006) while studying the ‘‘urban renaissance’’ phenom-enon in the U.S. Those authors found an associationbetween amenities and high-income people. Simi-larly, Florida (2002) argues that a concentration of‘‘Bohemians’’ (occupations covering authors; designers,musicians and composers; actors and directors; craft-artists, painters, sculptors, and artist printmakers;Figure 2.2 Components of regional economic resilience.6 Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04photographers, dancers; and artists, performers, andrelated workers) in a region will attract talented indi-viduals. These individuals are expected to have a posi-tive role during recessionary shocks. Lastly, Wojan(2014) highlights the positive role of the creative classduring recessions and that these types of workers tendto locate in areas with a high number of amenities.However, that author also noted that this associationwas stronger during the pre-recession period during1990s than during or after the recession period.2.6.5 Macroeconomic ConditionsThe macroeconomic conditions component aims tocapture the economic performance of a region prior tothe recession. Recessionary periods could accelerate orexacerbate socio-economic issues that already exist in aregion. It is known that recessions tend to dispropor-tionately affect minorities (such as African-Americansand Hispanics) and adults with few skills and limitededucation (Seefeldt et al., 2013). The situation was evenworse during the Great Recession, because it also hitmiddle- and high-income groups, which caused chari-table programs for low-income people to be curtailed.This, in turn, deepened the recession’s effects on lowincome people (Seefeldt et al., 2013). The macro-economic component also aims to capture differencesin regions’ performance because of other character-istics, such as tax climate. Tax policies could affect theability of a firm to retain workers during the hardshipof recessions and encourage new investment during theaftermath of recessions (Hicks & Kuhlman, 2011). Inthis study, it is hypothesized that economies with highvitality prior to the recession will have better perfor-mance during recessionary periods. The component ofmacroeconomic conditions is represented by unemploy-ment, poverty rates before the recession, and averageregional performance between two periods of analysis.Additional aspects include the presence of unions in thelabor market and ‘‘right to work’’ policies. The stateswith unions appeared to have fared better during therecession but also took longer to recover in the post-recession period.2.6.6 Social CapitalThis dimension refers to social networks, norms andsanctions that facilitate cooperation among individualsand communities (Halpern, 2005). The term becamepopular with Putnam’s publication ‘‘Bowling Alone’’(Healy & Coˆte´, 2001), and nowadays, there are variousstudies that provide evidence of the positive role thatsocial capital has on economic well-being (Partridgeet al., 2008). One of the traditional notions of socialcapital is that it influences the economic performance ofregions through the reduction of transactions costs;norms and sanctions ensure that business arrangementsand trade exchanges are made based on tacit trust. Forexample, the need to take care of a business reputationwithin a group eliminates the need for detailedcontractual documents (Halpern, 2005). Social capitalprovides the glue that facilitates co-operation, exchange,and innovation (The New Economy: Beyond the Hypeas cited by (Keeley, 2007). Similarly, it provides net-working for job opportunities that could ultimatelyinfluence the economy of a region (Keeley, 2007).Social capital has three dimensions (functions orcharacters in Halpern, 2005). The first, bonding, refersto intimate ties within families, close friends or asso-ciates, people who share culture and ethnicity or acommon identity. The second, bridging, goes beyondidentity to include associates, peers, and distant friends.The third dimension, linking, refers to the links outsidean individual’s circles. These are vertical links thatreflect the access to outside resources and ideas thatcould be used to support and guide local initiatives(Partridge et al., 2008).2.6.7 Infrastructure and Transportation AccessibilityThe components of infrastructure, services, and trans-portation accessibility aim to capture the availability ofdevelopment supporting infrastructure and access toservices. Infrastructure include roadways, railways,and ports in each region among others. The influenceof this dimension on regional economic performance isdiscussed in more detail in the forthcoming sections.This component also aims to reflect the level of acces-sibility to populations since it is expected that agglo-merated and urbanization economies reduce the effectsof recessions by allowing mobility of workers. Duringrecessions, firms or workers could try to relocate toareas with large markets, suppliers, and labor (Quigley,1998, as cited by Kreston & Wojcik, 2013).The role of transportation on RER is not as explicitas it is in the event of sudden natural or man-madedisturbances. Some literature, however, has identifiedtransportation, as one of the important assets sup-porting regional advantages that drive both regions’economic development and regions’ capacity to resistrecessions (see Ekogen et al., 2009; Jackson et al., 2015).Notwithstanding that evidence, the multi-dimen-sionality of ER (i.e., differences in time, space, geogra-phy, and factors affecting it) brings a level of complexitythat makes the study of the role of transportation cum-bersome. Consequently, there is an incomplete under-standing of how transportation infrastructure may affectthe ER of regions.The incorporation of transportation in the study ofresilience will be dependent on the paradigm of resi-lience used as well as the type of shock under consi-deration (i.e., the ‘‘of-what’’ and ‘‘to-what’’ dimensionsof resilience). Under the assumption that the physicalcapacity of regions is essential for maintaining a com-petitive advantage (Jackson et al., 2015), the notion ofsocial-ecological systems, which considers the socialand economic interactions between communities andregions, could be used to describe the role of trans-portation infrastructure on the long term capacity ofregions to resists recessions.Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04 7Although the contribution of transportation to theeconomic growth of a region has received significantattention, its role during periods of economic down-turns has not been widely examined. As shown in thepreceding sections, the study of ER presents indices andeconometric models that provide insightful results onthe economic behavior of the different regions; how-ever, most past studies have not examined or delineatedwhich transportation factors or regional characteristicscontribute to the regional performance during or afteran economic shock. (Jackson et al., 2015) presented atransportation component (‘‘dimension’’ in the originalarticle) that is composed of railroads and airports. Thatstudy also included a factor of scale and proximity thatconsiders the average commuting time. Another studyconducted in the U.K. (Ekogen et al., 2009) considereda component called ‘‘assets and infrastructure,’’ whichincludes rail connectivity and proximity to internationalairports. In addition, O¨sth et al. (2015) evaluated anadapted version of the resilience capacity index (RCI)and its relationship to a measure of accessibility to jobs.The authors concluded that ER and accessibility arecorrelated in a nonlinear fashion.Finally, as part of the econometric models presentedin the proceeding sections, many of those studies pointedout the association between specialization and diver-sification of industries and the resilient response ofregions. More specifically, the association of diversityof industries and resistant capacity to shocks appearsto be strong. Likewise, the association between indus-trial specialization and the rebound capacity of regionsis also strong. As for transportation linkages betweenregions, there is a trend towards specialization in indus-tries for which the region has a competitive advan-tage (Taaffe et al., 1996); therefore, a dichotomous roleof transportation on regional performance could behypothesized.3. DATA AND METHODS3.1 OverviewThe relationship between transportation accessibilityand Regional Economic Resilience (RER) was analyzedin different steps. Figure 3.1 describes the differentsteps that were undertaken. First, an opinion surveywas collected from transportation experts in Indiana.After the survey was collected, an Analytical HierarchyProcess (AHP) was used to identify possible relation-ships among the components mentioned in Section 2.6.The AHP was performed using the input from theexperts’ opinion survey. Once the relationship amongthe components was defined, the components thatresulted to strongly influence RER were modeled usingstructural equation models (SEM). For that last step,data that described each component was gathered fromdifferent public and proprietary sources. The finalmodel was used as an input for the RER tool, where ithelped to inform the robust, recovery and built scena-rios. Finally, the resilience index scores for each countyare a weighted average based on results from the experts’opinion survey and SEM results.3.2 Soliciting Experts’ OpinionsA questionnaire was designed in an attempt to collectinformation from experts about RER and interdepen-dencies within and among the aforementioned compo-nents. The two main objectives of soliciting experts’opinions were to understand if the stakeholders wereaware of the concept of RER in the context of the lasteconomic recession and to identify the direction andmagnitude of influence across the different componentsof RER prior to the last recession. The questionnaire(survey instrument) was designed in Qualtrics by thePurdue research team and was approved by the Insti-tutional Review Board (IRB) at Purdue University(IRB protocol #1803020346).3.2.1 Pilot InstrumentThe pilot instrument was examined in terms of theaccuracy of the instructions for each question andprovided better information on whether the designedinstrument could effectively accomplish the study objec-tives. The sample for the pilot survey consisted of 25students from a relevant transportation graduate classat Purdue University. The pilot survey was conductedbetween February 9 and 14, 2018. The results of thepilot survey allowed the researchers to evaluate andrefine the method used for the analysis.3.2.2 Final InstrumentThe final questionnaire began with an introductionabout the purpose of the study and important infor-mation for the participant, such as confidentiality, lengthof the survey, and contact information for the researchteam in case of further questions. The survey was dividedinto three sections. The first section collected data on res-pondents’ basic information, including the type of orga-nization they work for, their role in the decision-makingprocess for transportation projects in that organization,and the years of work experience that they have. Thesecond section asked about each respondent’s familiaritywith the concept of ‘‘RER.’’ The third section containednine questions aimed at understanding the respondent’sopinions on the magnitude of influences across the diffe-rent components of RER. These components includedhuman capital, industrial diversity, entrepreneurship, liva-bility, social capital, macroeconomic conditions, accessi-bility to labor and markets, and infrastructure (energy,health, and transportation). A blank space was alsoprovided for respondents to fill in up to two additionalfactors not listed within the survey. The first question inthe third section asked to what extent each of those com-ponents affect RER. The next eight questions askedexperts’ opinion to what extent each component influ-ences the others. Data collection started on March 22,2018 and ended on May 16, 2018. The survey was dis-tributed via email to INDOT, MPOs, Rural Planning8 Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04Organizations (RPOs), Indiana Association of RegionalCouncils (IARC), CONEXUS, Purdue Center forRegional Development (PCRD), and other transpor-tation consultancies. The survey was distributed to53 representatives of these organizations, with a 66%response rate (35 responses). From the 35 responses,only the 25 fully completed responses and were used inthe data analysis. The expert opinion results are pre-sented in the following sections. The final survey ques-tionnaire is attached in Appendix A.3.2.3 Expert Opinion Results3.2.3.1 Section 1: Respondents’ profile. Out of the 25valid responses, 8 of the respondents worked for MPOs,the most represented entity in the survey (Figure 3.2).Additionally, the survey was completed by 6 represen-tatives from INDOT and 4 individuals working forRPOs. Those that classified themselves as ‘‘other’’ statedthat they worked in other governmental entities.The main role of respondents is advisory role (11responses), followed by decision-makers. Four respon-dents chose the ‘‘other’’ option and stated that theyperform both roles or were the only staff in thoseorganizations (Figure 3.3).The final question in section one asked about yearsof work experience. Out of 24 respondents that ans-wered this question, 15 stated that they have worked forthirteen or more years in the transportation field. Thisfinding provides confidence in the opinions of the res-pondents, as this survey was intended to be answeredby experts in the transportation sector (Figure 3.4).3.2.3.2 Section 2: Familiarity with the RER concept.This section explored the familiarity of respondentswith the concept of RER (Figure 3.5). Of the 24 res-pondents that answered this question, 12 stated thatthey have heard of the concept, but they do not use itregularly. Only 3 respondents stated that they have notheard of RER.Of the different organizations represented in thissurvey, MPO representatives stated that they are familiarwith the concept of RER but do not use it regularly(Figure 3.6). Additionally, most of respondents fromINDOT stated that they have heard of RER but theyhave not used it. The ones that use it regularly are rep-resentatives from private consultancy firms.3.2.3.3 Section 3: Magnitude of influence of differentcomponents on RER. Of the components considered inthe survey, respondents stated which ones most stron-gly, or very strongly, influenced RER (Figure 3.7). Norespondent indicated that the components did not haveany influence on RER. Livability, social capital, andmacroeconomic conditions were considered by somerespondents as having little influence on RER. Amongthe other components, respondents answered that ethnic/racial diversity, education/training, and strategic planfor economic development were strong or very strongfactors affecting RER.3.3 Modeling InterdependenciesThe interdependencies between the different compo-nents of RER are not clearly stated in the literature. Eventhough social capital is expected to influence humancapital to some extent, the magnitude and direction ofthis influence is unknown. To that end, the followingsection presents two theoretical models used to identifythose influences. The first model used an AnalyticalHierarchy Process (AHP) to find the magnitude anddirection of the interaction and check the consistency ofsurvey responses. The second model applied explora-tory factor analysis (EFA) and SEM techniques to testthe statistical significance of those interactions.3.3.1 Preliminary Analysis: Analytical HierarchyProcess (AHP)Three different techniques were considered to performthe first analysis of the survey. Analytical HierarchyFigure 3.1 Process to identify the relationship between transportation and RER.Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04 9Process (AHP), Analytical Network Process (ANP), andFuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCM). A summary of the strengths,and weaknesses are presented in Table 3.1.AHP is a procedure for establishing priorities inmulti-criteria decision-making problems. Group deci-sion-making is one of its applications used around theworld in a variety of decision situations related togovernment, business, industry, and education. Theuse of AHP in the context of this project was mainlyprioritization, when the relative merit of member ofa set of alternatives is determined. This technique isalso the best well-known multi-criteria decision-makingmethod. Based on the pair-wise comparisons, the relativesignificance (weights) of elements of the hierarchy structureare calculated (Tsyganok, 2009). On a similar note, theANP is a generalization of the AHP; however, the ANP isrepresented by a network rather than a hierarchy. TheANP comprises of 4 steps: (i) model construction andproblem structuring, (ii) pairwise comparisons and priorityvectors, (iii) super-matrix formation using a Markov chainprocess, and (iv) synthesis of the criteria and alter-natives’ priorities, and selection of the best alternatives(Go¨rener, 2012) Both the AHP and ANP use pairwisecomparisons to measure the weights of the componentsof the structure, which are finally prioritized. Finally,FCMs have been used to model decision-making inFigure 3.2 Types of organizations where respondents work.Figure 3.3 Respondents’ role in the decision-making process for transportation projects.Figure 3.4 Respondents’ years of work experience.10 Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04social and political systems. That technique is computedby using fuzzy logic. This is typically derived subjec-tively from the judgments of experts knowledgeableabout a topic. As a result, the numerical weights givento edge strengths can vary depending on the expert.(Byung Sung Yoon & Jetter, 2017). In a numericalFigure 3.5 Familiarity with the concept of RER.Figure 3.6 Familiarity with the concept of RER among different organizations.Figure 3.7 Extent to which each of the components affect ER.Joint Transportation Research Program Technical Report FHWA/IN/JTRP-2020/04 11analysis, the concepts are represented by a state vectorand the relations between concepts by a fuzzy relationalmatrix. This method is often used in collaborativedecision-making.The research team finally decided to use only AHP tofind the interactions between the components. Asidefrom the strengths of this method, it was also chosenbecause it allows one to check consistency in the surveyresponses.