Employability themes for economic recovery

Conference reflections 
Compass: Journal of Learning and Teaching, Vol 14, No 3, 2021 
1 
Employability themes for economic recovery 
Helen Kofler 
University of Greenwich, UK 
 
 
Abstract  
As part of the University of Greenwich SHIFT 2021 conference on teaching and learning, I 
led a discussion workshop called ‘Employability themes for economic recovery’ in which 
delegates considered economic recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic, the inevitable 
changes in working practices and, consequently, the changes’ influence upon student 
employability skills development. In this article, I reflect both on the current context of 
significant workplace change across the globe and how we as educators should respond if 
we are to skill students for this new working world. 
A reflection 
In recent times, and especially as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, a landmark transition 
from face-to-face to virtual working practices has taken place. This article explores how 
these changes have consequences for the technical and soft skills at work, the impact of 
which may be viewed through three different lenses: of the employer, the employee and the 
educators. Impact is also explored from a short, medium and long-term perspective. The first 
focus is on how economic recovery from the pandemic crisis might take shape. Next, some 
of the current technical advances and implications for digital literacy is reviewed. Then, 
having explored the evolution of the workplace, conclusions are drawn with ideas shared at 
the workshop which led to actions for enhancing employability skills training for students at 
universities.  
Today, a ‘K’-shaped recovery, in which some organisations are benefiting massively from 
the crisis and others are falling behind (Aldrich, E., 2020), is beginning to happen. One such 
example is Zoom Video Communications Inc. which, at the time of writing, is currently valued 
at $100 billion in market capitalisation – roughly five times the value of British Telecom 
(Google Finance, 2021). One obvious reason for the success of firms like Zoom is their 
ability to pivot quickly and adapt to new virtual norms. Before the crisis, technology 
companies were one of the only sectors to have fully embraced remote working and as a 
result have been able to scale and ramp up services showing flexibility (Bick et al, 2020).  
During the SHIFT 2021 conference workshop, delegates were asked to think conceptually 
about reliance on technology and reflections were made on the delegates’ experiences over 
the last year, including engaging with colleagues and employers remotely and increasing 
reliance on tech (Preen, 2020). A poll was used to assess delegate response to the following 
statement: “The more we rely on technology the less we depend on our own intuition and 
judgement.” The majority of delegates found this statement to be false, suggesting that most 
are enjoying this supplementary addition to working practice.    
Virtual working has seen a rise in various trends, including: 1) a decentralised workforce 
which may be called ‘global villages’; 2) the rise of the digital nomad; 3) growth in the 
Conference reflections 
Compass: Journal of Learning and Teaching, Vol 14, No 3, 2021 
2 
numbers of project-based teams; 4) predictions of more flexible work, with companies hiring 
more freelance workers and a rise in the number of self-employed. Further, for some, remote 
working is fulfilling the promise of an improved work/life balance. It is clear that all of these 
trends will have an impact on what skills and work will be required by businesses (Global 
Solutions Summit, 2020).  
The change to remote working will certainly alter the traditional structures of leadership and 
management: it has been suggested that managers can no longer operate by means of 
command and control (The Executive Centre, 2019). Employees now have different 
expectations of managers who are increasingly acting as mentors, relying on emotional 
intelligence and empathy in the absence of those physical cues they would have had in the 
office (Rowell, 2019). At the other end of the spectrum, some organisations are using 
software to monitor remote-working productivity, viewing remote working as a risk to output 
(Global Solutions Summit, 2020). 
At the SHIFT 2021 conference workshop, delegates were asked to think conceptually about 
how they had engaged with colleagues remotely; they were also asked to respond to the 
statement ‘Being physically close to someone is important for truly collaborative work.’ Most 
favoured either ‘partly true’ or ‘true’ which suggests that people are missing the social 
interactions that come with working physically near to someone. Interestingly, some theorists 
suggest that relationships are formed through body language, heat and olfactory 
experiences; this being the case, virtual relationships are therefore lacking these dimensions 
of interaction (Bryan, 2020).  
At the Financial Times ‘New World of Work’ digital dialogue event, it was suggested that 
companies will need to reconsider the purpose of the office, to make it functional post 
pandemic. During the SHIFT workshop, participants discussed whether, post pandemic, the 
office should be seen as a collaborative creative space and, if so, how would the design be 
adjusted accordingly? If architecture is relevant, how might it be configured to optimise face-
to-face connections while keeping us safe? Some have suggested that, in the future, dual 
working – with a mixture of face-to-face and remote working according to the needs of the 
business – will be the norm (Financial Times Digital Dialogues, 2020).   
The delegates then looked at automation and how it could affect the skills required for work. 
McKinsey, the management consulting company, reports that 30% of work activities could 
be automated by 2030, which equates to 375 million global roles (Bick et al, 2020). An 
increase in automation may mean we need to update our digital literacy skills but also 
enhance softer human skills, enabling us to thrive in these virtual conditions. Reading and 
filtering out short messages via connectivity software could become the new listening in 
virtual conditions (Clark, 2020)? There could be a need for more creativity in the content we 
provide to compel us into engaging, since virtual communication may not be as rewarding? 
How will we cope with problem-solving in times of crisis when our colleagues are not sitting 
next to us?  
Delegates cited examples of how employers are viewing this skills gap. McKinsey says that 
while 87% of organisations are seeing skills gaps, only 28% are trying to close them 
(McKinsey Global Survey). JP Morgan has invested $350 million dollars to develop growing 
technical skills and Amazon has promised $700 million dollars to retrain employees for 
Conference reflections 
Compass: Journal of Learning and Teaching, Vol 14, No 3, 2021 
3 
skilled roles in tech (Bick et al, 2020). Another great example is Microsoft’s ‘Get On 2021’ 
which is a five-year campaign to help 1.5 million people in the United Kingdom (UK) to build 
careers in technology by 2025 (Financial Times Digital Dialogues, 2020).  
There are lots of other examples of organisations that are adapting to help equip students 
and graduates with employability skills. For example, PricewaterhouseCoopers has created 
a virtual park to give an insight into its work setting (PwC Careers, Virtual Park, 2020). It has 
also created an ‘Employability Hub’, which delivers skills workshops and insights to support 
staff (PwC Careers, Employability Hub, 2020). There has also been a rise in EdTech through 
organisations such as Handshake, a graduate events and recruitment platform, which works 
with employers and universities to help make students more employable (Handshake, 2021). 
To add to the discussion, recent graduates from the University of Greenwich attended the 
SHIFT workshop and shared their insights into the skills gaps they experienced when 
transitioning from higher education to remote working. Themes included: more demanding 
technical skills needed for specific job functions; confidence in adapting to different 
connectivity software platforms; resilience to use resources with little practical guidelines 
from others in close proximity; mental health and ways to keep yourself well when working 
on your own; virtual networking (a key issue) and the need for prior preparation (there are no 
physical cues as could have been relied upon in the physical office); general communication 
skills (including being able to talk openly with others about your skills and successes as they 
are not so readily visible in a virtual context). 
Delegates reflected on a framework – from the European Skills/Competencies, qualifications 
and Occupations commission (ESCO) – called ‘The Covid-19 Skills watcher’ (European 
Commission, 2020). This tool combines up-to-date labour market intelligence with evolving 
skills in the light of the pandemic. Although this is not a formula, it will help exploration into 
which skills are needed for a particular role. For universities, how can these skills be built 
into a professional development plan or teaching schedule? This also gives educators some 
structure to be able to talk about skills with relevant labour market intelligence so that 
students can target growing industries. Educators will, therefore, not be reacting, but 
planning and preparing more formally via provisions of support at universities.  
To conclude, the SHIFT conference workshop provided insights and provoked thought on 
the evolving, pandemic-related employability themes and demonstrated that more discussion 
is required in this area. There has clearly been a huge change to working practices and this 
has inevitably affected the skills graduates need for long-term success. Universities have a 
moral responsibility to make students more employable and so, ending the workshop with 
the words of Educational Reformer John Dewey, “If we teach today’s students as we taught 
yesterday’s, we rob them of tomorrow”, I asked delegates to think more deeply about the 
topic and to set the tone for a potential future discussion on student-centric skills 
development (Preen, 2020).  
  
Conference reflections 
Compass: Journal of Learning and Teaching, Vol 14, No 3, 2021 
4 
Reference list  
Aldrich, E. (2020) ‘What a K-shaped recovery means, and how it highlights a nation's 
economic inequalities.’ Business Insider. Available at: https://www.businessinsider.com/k-
shaped-recovery-
definition?r=US&IR=T#:~:text=A%20K%2Dshaped%20recovery%20is%20a%20post%2Drec
ession%20scenario%20in,K%22%20%E2%80%94%20hence%20the%20name  (Accessed: 
21 February 2021). 
Bick, R., Hazan, E., Khan, H., Lacroix, S., Sarrazin, H. and Welchman, T. (2020) ‘The future 
of work: Reskilling and remote working to recover in the next normal.’ McKinsey Digital, 
Available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/the-
future-of-work-reskilling-and-remote-working-to-recover-in-the-next-normal#  (Accessed: 21 
February 2021). 
Bryan, A. (2020) ‘Navigating the new rules of personal space in the workplace – Ideas, 
Wework.’ Available at: https://www.wework.com/ideas/worklife/navigating-the-new-rules-of-
personal-space-in-the-workplace  (Accessed: 21 February 2021). 
Clark, D. (2020) ‘What your Zoom body language says about you.’ Newsweek. Available at: 
https://www-newsweek-com.cdn.ampproject.org/c/s/www.newsweek.com/what-your-zoom-
body-language-says-about-you-1548438?amp=1 (Accessed: 21 February 2021). 
ESCO (European Commission) (2020) Covid-19 Skills Watcher. Available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/esco/portal/howtouse/bfe2a816-f9dd-49df-a7d2-ec8fafcfce95 
(Accessed: 13 January 2021). 
Financial Times Digital Dialogues (2020) ‘The New World of Work.’ Financial Times. 
Available at: https://newworldwork.live.ft.com/page/1649858/full-overview (Accessed: 21 
February 2021). 
Global Solutions Initiative - Global Solutions Summit panel discussion (2020) ‘The future of 
work in the post pandemic world - Global Solutions Initiative.’ Global Solutions Summit, 
Available at: https://www.global-solutions-initiative.org/global-table/the-future-of-work-in-the-
post-pandemic-world/ (Accessed: 21 February 2021). 
Google Finance (2021) Zoom Video Communications Inc. Google. Available at:  
https://www.google.com/finance/quote/ZM:NASDAQ (Accessed: 13 January 2021). 
Handshake (2021) Handshake. Available at: https://www.joinhandshake.com/ (Accessed: 21 
February 2021). 
Preen, M. (2020) The Future of Work Guide. Available at: 
https://nationalcareersweek.com/2021fow/ (Accessed: 21 February 2021). 
PWC Careers (2020) Employability Hub, PWC. Available at: 
https://www.pwc.co.uk/careers/student-careers/employability-
hub.html#:~:text=At%20PwC%2C%20we're%20focussed,Explore%20our%20different%20re
sources%20below (Accessed: 21 February 2021). 
 
Conference reflections 
Compass: Journal of Learning and Teaching, Vol 14, No 3, 2021 
5 
PWC Careers (2020) Virtual Park, PWC. Available at: 
https://www.pwc.co.uk/careers/student-careers/undergraduate-graduate-
careers/ourevents/virtual-park.html (Accessed 21 February 2021). 
Rowell, C. (2019) ‘Here’s why trust is key when embracing a flexible workplace.’ Wework. 
Available at: https://www.wework.com/ideas/office-design-space/heres-why-trust-is-key-
when-embracing-a-flexible-workplace (Accessed: 21 February 2021). 
The Executive Centre (2019) ‘Open Plan Design: What Have We Learned?’ The Executive 
Centre. Available at: https://www.executivecentre.com/blog-article/open-plan-design-what-
have-we-learned/ (Accessed: 21 February 2021). 
 
