Resilience of Pomorskie region to economic crisis.

ISSN 1732–4254 quarterlyjournal homepages:http://www.bulletinofgeography.umk.pl/http://wydawnictwoumk.pl/czasopisma/index.php/BGSS/indexhttp://www.degruyter.com/view/j/bogBulletin of GeoGraphy. Socio–economic SerieSBulletin of Geography. Socio–economic Series No. 25 (2014): 129–141resilience of pomorskie region to economic crisisGrzegorz masik1, CDFR, Stanisław rzyski2, MUniversity of Gdansk, Bażyńskiego 4, 80-952 Gdańsk, Poland; 1phone/fax: +48 585 236 590, e-mail: geogm@univ.gda.pl (correspond-ing autor); 2phone/fax: +48 585 236 574, e-mail: geosr@univ.gda.plHow to cite:Masik, G. and Rzyski, S., 2014: Resilience of Pomorskie region to economic crisis. In: Szymańska, D. and Środa-Murawska, S. editors, Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series, No. 25, Toruń: Nicolaus Copernicus University Press, pp. 129–141 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2478/bog-2014-0034abstract. Economic resilience is defined as the ability of the economy to over-come the negative external shocks. It depends on macroeconomic factors and internal conditions of the country or region. Macroeconomic factors include fis-cal policy, economic and monetary policy. Among the internal factors economic structure, the level of restructuring and modernization of enterprises, competitive-ness and innovation should be mentioned. Among the important soft internal fac-tors level of human capital, including entrepreneurship can be distinguished. The aim of the paper is to present the issue of economic resilience and explain what are the main factors constituting resilience of Pomorskie region (voivodship) in Poland. To achieve this aim, authors first give a theoretical introduction regard-ing the economic resilience concept as well as describe the methods of economic resilience measurement. Secondly the macroeconomic, external factors affecting the analysed region are discussed. Next the authors measure resilience of Pomor-skie region basing on statistical data and compare the resilience of Pomorskie re-gion with other regions in Poland. At the and the authors, basing on extensive interviews with experts, representatives of regional business and administration, attempt to explain why Pomorskie region is more resilient to economic crises than other Polish regions. In this part Pomorskie economy structure is presented too.contents:1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1302. Material and research methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1313. Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1323.1. Macroeconomic factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1323.2. Comparison of the Pomorskie economy to other Polish regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1323.3. Determinants of internal resilience in Pomorskie region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1354. Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138© 2014 Nicolaus Copernicus University Press. All rights reserved.© 2014 Nicolaus Copernicus University Press. All rights reserved.article details:Received: 22 January 2014Revised: 12 February 2014Accepted: 15 May 2014Key words:economic resilience,economic crisis,Pomorskie voivodship,macroeconomic factors,internal conditions.Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141130Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  139References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  139nomic structure; and finally, renewal, or the degree of change to the pre-shock growth path or trajectory.A characteristic feature of the definitions is the existence of external factors as contributing to the recession or slowdown in the economy. It is also stressed that internal characteristics of regions or countries (including the structural conditions) affect the depth, duration and speed of recovery from the recession.Apart from the economic resilience concept that is discussed in this paper, there is also another con-cept of spatial adaptation present in geographical literature. The concept of spatial adaptation have been proposed in 70s of 20th century (see Walker, 1975) and developed by Smith (1995), Stryjakiewicz (1999), Markowski and Marszał (1999). The concept referred to strategies of enterprises as a respond to changing external conditions on the market, espe-cially in the conditions of transforming economies of post-socialist countries. The concept of spatial adaptation seems to be less extensive than the concept of economic resil-ience. The first concept refers to the strategies of en-terprises responding to changing conditions on the market (May, 2008; Czapliński, 2010), while concept of economic resilience refers to wider, and more complex changes of regional economy. Moreover the concept of economic resilience encompasses not only production sector, but also service sector (Navarro-Espigares, Martín-Segura, 2012) as well as role of regional administration and other public en-tities (Chu, 2013). Sagan and Masik (2013) argue that the concept of economic resilience encompass-es also social aspects (entrepreneurship, qualifica-tions of labour force), demographic like migrations, structural aspects (diversified economic structure) and the role of place (strong developing agglomer-ation and its transportation links).In this article, concept of economic resilience is used because the authors go beyond analyses of strategies of enterprises, and look at regional econ-omy from wider perspective. The authors analyse various aspects, including political, social, demo-1. introductionThe concept of resilience is derived from environ-mental studies, and describes biological capacity to adapt and thrive under adverse environmental con-ditions (Christopherson et al., 2010: 3). The con-cept has been transferred to the social sciences and public policy as the good way of identification of responsive capacities of places and social systems to  global threats such as economic crisis, climate change and international terrorism (MacKinnon, Driscoll Derickson, 2013). As a result of the reces-sion of the U.S. and Europe economies, this con-cept began to be rapidly developed in economics and regional science. Therefore the economic resil-ience concept is more and more significant in in-ternational studies.Economic resilience refers to “the policy-induced ability of an economy to recover from or adjust to the negative impacts of adverse exogenous shocks and to benefit from positive shocks” (Briguglio at al., 2009: 233). In economics, resilience has been defined in terms of return to a fixed and narrowly defined equilibrium (as measured by employment, for example) or, in the more liberal version, multi-ple equilibria (Christopherson et al., 2010: 3). Simi-larly, regional resilience can be defined as “an ability of a region to anticipate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from a disturbance” (Foster, 2007: 14). Hill et al. (2008: 4) see resilience as “the ability of a  region … to recover successfully from shocks to its economy that either throw it off its growth path or have the potential to throw it off its growth path”. In the research of economic resilience an evo-lutionary approach is proposed (Simmie, Martin, 2010), in which one assesses changes in the econ-omy during and after the recession. Martin (2012) suggests that there are four interrelated dimensions to regional resilience: resistance, or the differential ability of regions to resist disruptive changes such as recessionary shocks; recovery, or the ability of a re-gion to recover effectively from shocks; re-orientation or the extent to which the region changes its eco-Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141 131graphical that make regional economy stable de-spite unstable macroeconomic conditions.According to (Briguglio et al., 2009: 229) the re-silience is determined by: macroeconomic stability, fiscal deficit, inflation and unemployment, external debt, microeconomic market efficiency (including the efficient market mechanisms), good governance (appropriate government intervention to foster eco-nomic resilience), developed and responsible socie-ty, with a high level qualifications and good health. In contrast to the resilience the same authors define the economic vulnerability as “exposure of an econ-omy to exogenous shocks, arising out of economic openness”. They also suggest that the vulnerability is affected by economic openness, export concen-tration, dependence on strategic imports.S. Christopherson et al. (2010: 6-7) point out that, in the context of the economic resilience, there are several, universal factors of particular importance that allow regions to adjust and adopt to chang-ing conditions over time. These are: (a) a strong regional system of innovation (Clark et al., 2010); (b) strength in factors that create a ‘learning region’ (Archibugi, Lundvall, 2001); (c) a modern produc-tive infrastructure (transport, broadband provision, etc.); (d) a skilled, innovative and entrepreneurial workforce; (e) a supportive financial system provid-ing patient capital; (f) a diversified economic base, not over-reliant on a single industry.Economic resilience to the crisis stems from structure and the function of the national/region-al system and its international links. The ability of the economy to respond to external impulses can be equated with the ability of public institutions and companies to make quick decisions, and therefore rapid changes that can favour preserving the stabil-ity of development. The activities of the public at national level come down largely to the appropri-ate economic and fiscal policy of the state, mon-etary policy of the central bank and the necessary reforms. Decisions taken by companies concern an appropriate level of investment. Decisions taken by customers concern a level of consumption.2. material and research methodsThere are three main data sources used in this re-search. First - desk research resulting in description of macroeconomic factors affecting economy of Po-morskie region. A review of the literature also al-lowed to identify critical industries and their share in production, employment and export of the Po-morskie region. Second - statistical data, which has been employed to measure resilience index that en-abled authors to compare resilience of Pomorskie region to other regions in Poland. Third - qualita-tive research involving more than thirty interviews of entrepreneurs, representatives of business sup-port institutions, local and regional administra-tions, academics and NGOs activists. Interviews conducted in spring 2013 made it possible to iden-tify macroeconomic factors, mostly responsible for the stabilization of the country’s and regional econ-omy during the crisis in Europe. The interviews also helped to identify features of Pomorskie re-gion economy and society that promoted resilience of this region to the crisis. Economic resilience is measured by variety of indicators. The most commonly used include Gross Domestic Product, Gross Value Added, disposable income, sectoral employment, productivity, work-force, employment, number of enterprises/start-ups, business in highly exporting sectors, innovations and qualification levels. The most important meas-ures that allow to compare the resilience of regional and national economies to the crisis are employ-ment and GDP (Fingleton et al., 2012; Briguglio et al., 2009).Due to limited accessibility of high quality data enabling comparisment at level of NUTS 3, the au-thors employed the following five indicators that describe region’s resilience to the crises: Gross Do-mestic Product per capita, employment rate, dispos-able income, number of national economy entities and income from selling innovative goods on for-eign markets. Above mentioned indicators not only refer to economic aspects of the resilience, but also describe social context (employment rate, disposa-ble income). What is more, a number of national economy entities reflects entrepreneurship level of regional community, and income from selling inno-vative goods on foreign markets may reflect quali-fications of regional labour force. The changes of above mentioned indicators in Pomorskie region and other regions of Poland have been examined. On the basis of the five chosen indicators resil-ience index has been calculated as follows: firstly, Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141132value of change expressed as a percentage for the re-gion has been divided by the maximum value, the average for each of the regions was calculated (see Gołembski, 1999; Runge, 2007). In the case of employment rate, number of na-tional economy entities and income from selling in-novative goods on foreign markets the decline was recorded. In order to eliminate negative values, the value equal to minimum was added. The obtained values allowed to keep the primary differentiation among regions, expressed as a percentage. The in-dex value equal to 1 would mean that resilience has achieved the highest rates compared to other re-gions. A value of 0 would mean that the region has achieved the lowest rates. Values close to 1 for the re-gions mean that they proved to be more resilient to the crisis than the regions with values very close to 0.3. results3.1. macroeconomic factorsThe fiscal and economic crisis in the United States and Western Europe has not caused a recession in Poland, although there was a real threat of note two quarters consecutive with a decrease in gross do-mestic product. The Polish economy has proved to be more resilient to the crisis than not only the neighbouring countries of Central and Eastern Eu-rope, but also then Southern Europe and even West-ern Europe. Therefore it is worth asking question, what are the reasons?In the Polish public debate, it is emphasized that a significant external factor affecting the stability of the economy are European funds. The inflow of funds invested mainly in infrastructure contribut-ed to increase of turnover in the economy, which enabled it to increase even during the crisis in Eu-rope. Another important factor, supporting the re-silience of the economy, which is often overlooked, was the introduction of so-called Vienna Initiative (The Economist, 2013). This initiative based on a voluntary agreement of banks aimed at streamlining operations in crisis. This action has enabled to sup-press western banks against massive drain of capital from their branches in Central Europe.Another key factor contributing to economic re-silience was a ‘healthy’ banking system in Poland as a result of conservative policy pursued by the sec-tor, including a good relation of loans to depos-its and relatively low lending in foreign currencies. Important for positive GDP growth was weakening of the Polish currency as a result of the global fi-nancial crisis and the outflow of capital to devel-oped countries. Depreciation of the currency made Polish companies more competitive by selling goods on world markets at lower prices than before the crisis (Rachwał, 2011). Interviewed representatives of the regional in-stitutions and businesses a high level of domestic consumption recognized as a key factor to main-tain economic growth in Poland and Pomorskie re-gion. This was despite the incessant media reports on the crisis in Europe. Only since the end of 2012, the level of consumption began to fall.Countercyclical fiscal policy of Polish govern-ment has undoubtedly contributed to mitigation the financial crisis negative effects. During the econom-ic boom in the years 2003-2007 the budget deficit fell from over 6% of GDP to less than 2%. During the economic downturn in 2011, increased again to almost 8% of GDP. In 2012, the budget deficit fell to less than 4% of GDP (GUS, 2014). Among the oth-er public activities that enabled to stabilize economy in the first wave of the crisis, the monetary policy should be pointed out. In the years 2008-2009 de-posit interest rate determined by the National Bank of Poland fell from 4.5 to 2%. In 2010-2012 the de-posit rate increased from 2 to 3%, but in 2013 again dropped to 1%. Interviewed economists emphasized that lowering the interest rate has encourage banks to increase financing of the real economy. During the second wave of the European crisis Polish economy was more vulnerable to external negative impulses than during the first wave of the crises. This is due to National currency is strong-er than in the first wave of the crisis, ending in-frastructure projects financed from European funds from the budget for the years 2007-2013 and de-creasing domestic consumption (NBP, 2013).3.2. comparison of the pomorskie economy to other polish regionsMain economic factors illustrating condition of Po-morskie economy in recent years shows that Pomor-Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141 133skie region was relatively more resilient to economic crises than other Polish regions. During the years 2007-2012 employment rate in Poland increased by 2.3%. The largest increase in employment was re-corded in Pomorskie (almost 12%) and in the re-gions of Silesia (Śląskie – industrial region), Mazovia (Mazowieckie – Warsaw region) and Kujawsko-Po-morskie (Table 1). Table 1 shows that employment rate increased not only in the regions traditionally considered as economicaly strong (Śląskie, Wielko-polskie), but also in Kujawsko-Pomorskie and Za-chodniopomorskie.table 1. Changes of selected indicators in Polish voivodshipsVoivodshipincreaseaof GDp per capitabemployment rate changecDisposable income changeb, dnational economy entities changecchange of the share of net revenues from the sale of innovative  products for exportc %Dolnośląskie 18.2 -5.1 9.2 8.5 10.0Kujawsko-Pomorskie 8.5 6.5 3.4 -0.3 6.3Lubelskie 12.7 -0.9 6.7 8.7 -7.9Lubuskie 8.3 -7.6 3.8 1.2 19.9Łódzkie 13.3 -4.0 3.4 -2.9 31.9Małopolskie 11.4 1.6 10.6 14.4 -18.0Mazowieckie 15.4 6.7 13.7 10.3 -107.3Opolskie 9.0 -0.7 5.8 3.9 18.7Podkarpackie 12.7 -0.7 3.9 8.4 -115.9Podlaskie 11.7 2.0 4.9 6.4 -25.6Pomorskie 10.0 11.8 9.5 12.2 20.4Śląskie 12.6 7.5 7.8 5.8 -65.5Świętokrzyskie 11.1 1.4 4.1 1.1 -3.0Warmińsko-Mazurskie 11.5 -6.3 7.3 5.7 -278.2Wielkopolskie 12.9 4.5 8.6 9.2 21.5Zachodniopomorskie 9.6 3.5 5.8 2.9 -85.8Poland 12.2 2.3 8.1 7.3 -28.9Explanation: a – calculation based on data in Euro; b – data for the years 2007-2010; c – data for the years 2007-2012; d – income corrected for cumulative inflation rateSource: Own’s elaboration based on Eurostat (2013) and GUS (2014) dataThe employment rate depends on the condition of the regional economy, its structure, the level of competitiveness, and the level of entrepreneurship in relation to other economies. Also the continu-ous improvement of work organization in compa-nies helps to avoid negative consequences on labour market during crisis. Interviewed experts claim that this modernization, made before the European cri-sis and low labour costs, caused that many of job positions were saved in Poland, as opposed to most European countries. What is more, the increase in the number of employees in Poland during the cri-sis in Europe can be associated with an increase in cost competitiveness of Polish economy which re-sulted from weakening of the Polish currency. In-terviewed experts however underlined that higher growth of employment in some regions, including Pomorskie, than the national average can be asso-ciated with an increase of competitiveness through technological upgrading of enterprises enhanced to some extent by the EU funds. This can be connect-ed with an increase in infrastructure investments co-financed from the EU funds which enabled to preserve workplaces in construction sector.Differential results were observed in regions if we take into account the increase in GDP per capita Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141134(Table 1). The largest increase was recorded in the regions of Dolnośląskie (Lower Silesia; over 18%), Mazowieckie and Łódzkie. Economies of those re-gions grew much faster than Polish economy as a whole (average GDP growth per capita was 12.2%). Regions lacking large and strong metropolitan ar-eas grew slower than national average. Pomorsk-ie region, where GDP growth reached 10%, falls to this group, despite the highly populated and eco-nomically strong Gdańsk metropolitan area which is the core of the region. According to interviewed experts, this could lead us to the conclusion that Gdańsk metropolitan area does not uses its resourc-es as good as it could. This can be related to pe-ripheral location of the metropolitan area and lack of capacity of public institutions to attract signif-icant investment to the region. The distance from Western markets, including German (less commer-cial contacts) could affect the slower growth of the examined region too.We can observe that disposable income of house-holds increased in all examined regions, reaching 8,1% as Polish average. The highest values of exam-ined indicator have been recorded in Mazowieckie (13.7%), Małopolskie (10.6%) and Pomorskie region (9.5%). The average disposable income of house-holds is strongly and positively associated with both employment rate and wages. This could suggest that competitiveness of Pomorskie economy was to less extant associated with low work force costs than with other factors.  When we take into account a change of number of national economy entities, Pomorskie is again among leading regions in Poland. The increase of national economy entities in Pomorskie reached 12.2%, while Polish average was 7.3%. Increase of national economy entities is to high extant caused by increasingly common self-employment. Instead of employing a new worker, companies prefer to contract services with one-man businesses. This tendency is particularly present in large scale urban agglomerations. Increase of national economy enti-ties reflects flexibility of the economy and its ability to adopt to harsh external conditions by reduction of labour costs.  The share of revenues from the sale of innova-tive products for export was the only analysed indi-cator that dropped. The Polish average was -28.9%. Pomorskie region is one of few where high increase of revenues from the sale of innovative products for export has been recorded. The higher increase have been recorded only in Małopolskie region (31.9%). Golejewska (2012) claims that before the crises, higher expenditures on R&D and higher level of employment in R&D sector has been re-corded in mentioned regions than elsewhere. There are three regions where outstanding decrease has been recorder. These are Warminsko-Mazursk-ie (-278.2%), Podkarpackie (-115.9%) and Mazow-ieckie (-107.3%). According to (Dominiak, Churski, 2012) a high level of socio-economic development of regions is strongly associated with level of inno-vations, which in turn affects resilience of regional economies to crises The combination of analyzed indicators enabled the authors to construct the index of economic resil-ience. The economic resilience above the average is observed in Pomorskie, Mazowieckie, Małopolskie, Wielkopolskie, Dolnoślaskie and Śląskie region (Ta-ble 2 and Fig. 1). Pomorskie proved to be more re-silient to economic crises than any other Polish region, including highly industrialized Śląskie re-gion and Mazowieckie, the capital region.  What is important, there are strong and developing urban areas in all mentioned regions, including Warsaw, Cracow, Katowice, Wrocław and Gdańsk.  table 2. Resilience index of regions in PolandVoivodship resilience indexPomorskie 0.82Mazowieckie 0.78Małopolskie 0.74Wielkopolskie 0.73Dolnośląskie 0.68Śląskie 0.65Poland 0.63Lubelskie 0.62Podlaskie 0.57Opolskie 0.52Podkarpackie 0.50Kujawsko-Pomorskie 0.50Swietokrzyskie 0.50Zachodniopomorskie 0.50Łódzkie 0.43Lubuskie 0.39Warmińsko-Mazurskie 0.35Source: Own’s elaboration based on Table 1Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141 135The most vulnerable regions to the crises are Warmińsko-Mazurskie, Lubuskie and Łódzkie. Both Warmińsko-Mazurskie and Lubuskie are lacking large scale urban areas able to generate high add-ed value jobs which is not favourable to resilience during the economic crisis. Whereas Łódzkie region where Łódź, the third largest city in Poland is locat-ed is undergoing large scale structural changes. The collapsing textile industry is currently replaced by electronic industry, largely involving simple assem-bly of electronic products. This long-lasting proc-ess makes Łódzkie region vulnerable to economic crises.Stability of employment (or increase) indicates the resistance to external shocks, similarly GDP growth and others. It should be noted, however, that employment in the public sector is generally not a subject to cyclical fluctuations as much as in the private sector. Thus, the ratio of employment in both sectors also affects the resilience during the economic slowdown or recession. Regardless to the reasons of the stability of the level of employment it should be noted that the regions where employ-ment is not falling are recognized as more resistant to external shocks. Similar objections can be raised to the GDP. Its growth can arise due to external public transfers (e.g. public investments) or a sig-nificant increase in the debt of the public sector in-cluding local and regional governments. Similarly as employment, growth of GDP in regions and other used indicators, indicates its resilience. 3.3. Determinants of internal resilience in pomorskie regionEconomic resilience of regions to economic crises is lined to the share of invulnerable (stable) sectors in regional employment structure or structure of re-gional GDP. G. Gorzelak (2009) lists several invul-nerable sectors of Polish economy that remained stable despite the European economic crises. These fig. 1. Resilience index of regions in PolandSource: Own’s elaboration based on Table 2Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141136were food sector, advertising industries, outsourc-ing sector and retail sector. Bank and financial sec-tor were pointed as most vulnerable to the crises, but nevertheless those sectors did better in Poland than in Western countries. This was due to effi-cient operation of the Financial Supervision Com-mission, slightly-developed investment banking and conservative banking policy - limited offer of com-plex financial products and good relation of loans to deposits. The other sectors pointed by Gorzelak (2009) as vulnerable were construction sector, real estate market, automotive sector, IT sector, trans-portation sector, metallurgical sector textile sector and tourism sector.The sectors of most significance for the Po-morskie region economy remained relatively resil-ient to economic crises in Western Europe. These were petrochemical, pharmaceutical, paper and food sector. In Poland, those traditional produc-tion sectors remained stable in the first stage of the crises. This was mainly due to stable consumption of basic goods in the beginning of crises (Rachwał, 2011). Health and education sector, which are also of great importance for Pomorskie region econo-my stayed stable due to the fact that these sectors are not very much dependent on economic cycles. Tourism sector, which is also crucial for Pomorskie region economy remained also stable. This was due to predominance of domestic tourists that drive this sector in Pomorskie. Interviewed representatives of regional author-ities emphasized that there were several sectors of Pomorskie region economy that turned out vulner-able for external shocks. These were the export-ing sectors, strongly linked with foreign markets, i.e. shipbuilding sector, IT sector, furniture sec-tor, financial sector and fish processing sector. The sectors most affected by the loss of demand on in-ternational markets were IT sector and to less ex-tant furniture sector. Local or regional origin of companies of con-struction sector, food sector, shipbuilding sector, petrochemical sector, pharmaceutical sector and furniture sector made them less vulnerable to ex-ternal shocks. The companies of listed sectors are managed by local or regional leaders and have ad-vantage of highly skilled local workers. The com-panies representing IT and paper sector located in Tczew or Kwidzyn are managed from foreign head offices which make those companies more vulnera-ble for external shocks. Logistics and transportation sector have been developing in Pomorskie region despite those  sec-tor are known as vulnerable for economic crises. This was mostly due to large scale investments that made Gdansk and Gdynia ports more attractive for worldwide transportation companies. The most im-portant turn in that respect was opening a Deep Water Container Terminal in Gdansk which is able to operate the largest container vessels in the world. This made Gdansk a transportation hub linked di-rectly with ports of China and enabled Gdansk to compete with ports of Hamburg or Rotterdam. Vulnerability to the external shocks, unlike the resilience, is strongly related to the economic open-ness (Briguglio et al., 2009) which can be measured as the ratio of international trade to GDP. Pomorsk-ie is one of leading regions in Poland, when to take into consideration openness of its economy. Strate-gia Rozwoju Województwa… (2012: 10) points out that “the region is economically opened which is proofed by high share of export in region’s GPD structure (3rd place in Poland) and high share of high technology products in the structure of ex-port (2nd place in Poland)”. We can also read in cited publication that Pomorskie region is extraordinary vulnerable to external economic shocks. High share of export in region’s GDP structure is not favourable to its resilience to the external shocks. Export of Pomorskie region however, con-sists mainly of high technology products which are exported to the relatively economically stable re-gions and countries (e.g. Germany). What is more, although Pomorskie region is relatively economical-ly opened in comparison to other Polish regions, its openness to foreign markets is much smaller than openness of regions in Western Europe. Thus we can conclude that weak economic links of regions in Poland, including Pomorskie, prevented those re-gions form decrease of employment and GDP dur-ing the first wave of economic crises.According to the OECD classification, Pomorsk-ie region export comes from so called medium low technology sectors, however in comparison to oth-er Polish regions, Pomorskie exports relatively tech-nologically advanced products. The high share of low technology products exported form the region accompanied by rising production costs can pose Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141 137a  hreat to the pace of recovery from the recession in the event of a crisis in the future.Pomorskie region export is mostly directed to EU member states (more than 60% of export) in-cluding economically stable countries i.e. Germa-ny, The Netherlands, Sweden, and Denmark. What is interesting, the share of export directed to non EU member states is much higher in Pomorskie re-gion (more then 30%)  than in other Polish regions. United States and Norway are the non EU states of the greatest importance for Pomorskie region ex-port (Handel zagraniczny województwa…, 2008). The Export of Pomorskie region is diversified, what makes Pomorskie region economy less vulnerable to the external shocks. Many interviewed entrepreneurs underline that Small and Medium companies, are of crucial im-portance for Pomorskie region economy. Small businesses are more flexible than large scale com-panies and are able to respond to the market chang-es faster than international entities, where decisions are made in distant head offices. Often, the deci-sions made there do not take into account eco-nomic efficiency of their remotely located branches and/or economic situation of given country or re-gion. A high share of small and medium companies in Pomorskie region economic structure can foster economic resilience of the region. Representatives of NGO’s emphasizes that Po-morskie is one of the most entrepreneurial regions in Poland. Pomorskie region is the third in Poland when we take into consideration the number of en-terprises per thousand inhabitants. We can also ob-serve a high number of newly registered enterprises in Pomorskie region (2nd place in Poland) when comparing to other regions in Poland. The entre-preneurship ratio used in Raport o stanie… (2011), shows that Pomorskie region is the second entre-preneurial region in Poland after leading Mazow-ieckie region. It is usually underlined that ability of companies to compete and their innovativeness are favoura-ble to economic growth of a region (Markowska, 2012) and to its resilience during the economic cri-sis (Christopherson et al., 2010). Pomorskie region share of innovative companies is small, just as in other regions of the country. A share of medium and large companies in Pomorskie region is rela-tively small when comparing with other regions of the country. This may affect the innovativeness lev-el of companies in the region, as medium and large companies play most crucial role in the transfer of innovative technologies from foreign countries (Świadek, 2012). What is more insufficient econom-ic benefits from the cooperation of research centres with business and insufficient incentives for entre-preneurs cause little companies engagement in R&D processes, including improving innovation.The competitiveness of production in Pomor-skie region, as in other regions of the country, is mainly caused by low labour costs (and hence the low prices of products) and not technological in-novation of finished products. At the present stage of development, however, Pomeranian companies can sell their products to external markets due to low labour costs. Currently, situation of this kind strengthens the competitiveness of Pomorskie re-gion economy. In the long run, when labour costs is inevitably increasing this factor would have less and less importance. An example of placement of foreign companies branches in Gdańsk and Gdynia is a rapidly grow-ing sector of the BPO (business process outsourc-ing). With lower labour costs in Poland (including in Pomorskie) than in Western Europe, Polish work-ers provide sufficient qualifications for the sector.In the long run, demographic and social  con-ditions also affect resilience of regions to economic crises. According to interviewed experts, high level of entrepreneurship, spatial and occupational mo-bility favour economic resilience of the Pomorsk-ie region. Liberal attitudes, independence, lack of demanding attitudes in society foster economic competitiveness which in turn affects resilience of regional economy to the crises. Pomorskie region is one of four Polish re-gions including Mazowieckie, Wielkopolskie, and Małopolskie, where positive net migration has been recorded for number of years (GUS, 2014). Listed regions are also known as most economic resilient (Fig. 1). Inflow of relatively young and active mi-grants favour competitiveness of the region and makes the region more resilient to external eco-nomic shocks.Highly skilled and well educated workforce is also of a great importance for building economic resilience of the region. In Pomorskie highly skilled shipbuilding sector workers enhanced specialization Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141138of this sector. Business representatives suggested that this resulted in extensive collaboration of re-gional shipbuilding and yacht manufacturing com-panies with foreign partners. The most tight links are kept among Pomeranian and Scandinavian com-panies of this sector. Highly skilled workers are also advantage of Pomeranian companies of petrochemi-cal sector, energy sector, pharmaceutical sector, and furniture sector. The quarter of Pomeranian student are those studying technical courses. This makes Pomorskie region one of leading in Poland in that respect (Szmytkowska et al., 2010). Study courser related to maritime sectors and health sector are also of great importance for regional economy.Population of Pomorskie region is known as one of most active in the social sphere, when comparing with other Polish regions. The number of NGOs per capita is high above Polish average. Social capital of Pomorskie region is also much higher than many other Polish regions, but still medium when com-paring with regions of Western countries. Pomor-skie is a leading Polish region in respect of quality of life index, which means that people living in this region are more happy and satisfied that peo-ple living in other Polish regions (Czapiński, Panek, 2011). Social activity of Pomorskie region popula-tion can be also illustrated by political commitment. The turnout in the parliamentary election of 2011 in Pomorskie region was much higher than in majority of Polish regions (second place in Poland). Relative-ly young population of Pomorskie region is more liberal than population of other Polish regions. In mentioned elections, the liberal party - Platforma Obywatelska gained score reaching 51%, in Pomor-skie region. This was the highest score of this par-ty in Poland (Państwowa Komisja Wyborcza, 2014). Liberal attitudes are typical for young populations, which can adopt to changing economical and social circumstances, have high qualifications, are entre-preneurial  and are not afraid of loosing privileg-es. These features indicate flexibility of communities and favour building of resilience to external shocks.4. conclusionsThe macroeconomic external factors including fis-cal policy of government and monetary policy of central bank affect the economic resilience of the region. Counter-cyclical government policy and low deposit interest rate determined by the Nation-al Bank of Poland  favoured maintaining jobs and economic growth during the downturn. Moreover, behaviour of the banking sector, including main-taining high liquidity was of great importance too. Conservative policy of this sector based on financ-ing the real economy caused that relatively few companies went bankrupt.Studies conducted in Pomorskie allow us to con-clude that the resilience of the region compared to other regions in the country is high. Macroeconom-ic factors were of great importance for the growth of the economy in the first wave of the crisis have. During the second wave of the crisis, and after the cessation of negative external impulses, the impor-tance of internal factors grew. The internal factors are favourable to Pomorskie economic resilience due to the diversification of production, a small proportion of sensitive industries, a growing share of export of high tech products and due to the ties with stable countries in economic terms. Techno-logical modernization allowed companies to raise the level of competitiveness which also fostered eco-nomic resilience of the region.Improving the level of human capital, includ-ing the level of entrepreneurship, are the soft fac-tors which favoured economic resilience. It should be noted, however, that rootlessness of some inter-national companies mainly in the electronics sector and the lack of investment in research and develop-ment adversely affects the stability of the Pomorskie region. Another problem is the low level of innova-tion of Pomorskie companies.The region’s economy has not made a significant reorientation. The only significant change was the decreased of traditional shipbuilding industry ac-companied by increase of production of specialized ships and yachts. More people found employment in the outscoring sector in recent years. Tempo-rary difficulties in the electronics sector as well as in the financial and the construction sector did not change significantly the structure of region’s econ-omy. Pomorskie region economy was prepared for and responded to economic slowdown. According to interviewed experts a major role in this played a skilful cooperation between employers and employ-ees in a difficult period of economic slowdown. It Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141 139was manifested by adopting a flexible working time and limited wage demands which helped stabilize employment. It should also be noted that the Po-morskie region has the ability to resist disruptive changes caused by external factors.acknowledgementThe paper presents results of research conducted in Pomorskie region and several European regions within the international project entitled Economic Crisis: Resilience of Regions (ECR2) in the frame-work of the ESPON 2013 Programme.referencesarchibugi, D. and lundvall, B.a. editors, 2001: The Globalising Learning Economy, Oxford: Oxford Uni-versity Press.Briguglio, l., cordina, G., farrugia n. and Vella S., 2009: Economic Vulnerability and Resilience: Con-cepts and Measurements, Oxford Development Stud-ies, Volume 37, No. 3, pp. 229-247. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13600810903089893christopherson, S., michie, J. and tyler p., 2010: Re-gional resilience: theoretical and empirical perspec-tives, Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, Volume 3, No. 1, pp. 3–10. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cjres/rsq004chu, y-h., 2013: Coping with the Global Financial Cri-ses: institutional and ideational sources of Taiwan’s economic resiliency. In: Journal of Contemporary China, Taylor & Francis Group, Volume 22, Issue 82, pp. 649-668. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10670564.2013.766385clark, J., huang, h.i. and Walsh, J., 2010: A typology of ‘Innovation Districts’: what it means for region-al resilience, Cambridge Journal of Regions, Econo-my and Society, Volume 3, No. 1, pp. 121–137. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/0.1093/cjres/rsp034czapiński, J. and panek, t. editors, 2011: Diagnoza społeczna 2011 (Social diagnosis 2011 – in Polish), Warszawa: VizjaPress&IT.czapliński, p., 2010: Przestrzenny wymiar procesów transformacji przemysłu w województwie pomor-skim (Spatial dimension of the transformation proc-ess in Pomorskie region – in Polish). In: Zioło, Z. and Rachwał T. editors, Processes Of Transformation of Industry and Services in Regional and National Spatial Systems, Prace Komisji Geografii Przemysłu Polskiego Towarzystwa Geograficznego, No. 15, Warszawa-Kraków, pp. 130-141.Dominiak, J. and churski, p., 2012: Rola innowacji w kształtowaniu regionów wzrostu i stagnacji gospo-darczej w Polsce (The role of innovation in the forma-tion of regions of development and those of economic stagnation in Poland – in Polish). In: Studia Region-alne i Lokalne, No. 4(50), Warszawa: Wydawnictwo Naukowe Scholar. Eurostat, http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/eurostat/home/ Date of Access: 02-12-2013fingleton, B., Garretsen, h. and martin, r., 2012: Re-cessionary shocks and regional employment: evidence on the resilience of U.K. regions. In: Journal of Region-al Science, Volume 52, No. 1, pp. 109-133. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9787.2011.00755.xfoster, K.a., 2007: A Case Study Approach to Under-standing Regional Resilience. Working Paper 2007–08, Institute of Urban and Regional Development, Berkeley: University of California.Golejewska, a., 2012: Innowacyjność a konkurencyjność regionalna krajów Grupy Wyszehradzkiej w latach 1999–2008 (Innovation and regional competi-tiveness  in the Visegrad Group, 1999–2008 – in Polish). In: Zioło, Z.and Rachwał, T. editors, Wpływ innowacyjności na zmiany gospodarki w układach przestrzennych, Prace Komisji Geografii Przemysłu Polskiego Towarzystwa Geograficznego, No. 19, Warszawa-Kraków, pp. 93-115Gołembski, G. editor, 1999: Regionalne aspekty rozwo-ju turystyki (Regional aspects of tourism develop-ment– in Polish), Warszawa-Poznań: Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN.Gorzelak, G. editor, 2009: The geography of the Polish crisis. A crisis of the periphery or a periphery of the crisis? Warszawa: Regional Studies Association. Polish Section.GUS, 2014: Główny Urząd Statystyczny (Central Statisti-cal Office – in Polish), http://www.stat.gov.pl Date of Access: 20-02-2014Handel zagraniczny województwa pomorskiego w latach 2000-2006 (Foreign trade of Pomorskie region in the Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141140years 2000-2006– in Polish), 2008: Gdańsk: Urząd Marszałkowski Województwa Pomorskiego.hill, e.W., Wial, h. and Wolman, h., 2008: Exploring Regional Economic Resilience. Working Paper 2008–04, Institute of Urban and Regional Development, Berkeley: University of California.Identyfikacja potencjalnych klastrów na bazie analizy struktury gospodarki województwa pomorskiego (Identification of potential clusters based on the anal-ysis of the structure of the Pomorskie region’s econ-omy – in Polish), 2008: Gdańsk: Instytut Badań nad Gospodarką Rynkową.macKinnon, D. and Driscoll Derickson, K., 2013: From resilience to resourcefulness: A critique of re-silience policy and activism. In: Progress in Human Geography, No. 37,  pp. 253-270. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0309132512454775markowska, m., 2012: Dynamiczna taksonomia innowacyjności regionów (Dynamic taxonomy of in-novativeness of regions – in Polish), Seria: Monografie i Opracowania, No. 221, Wrocław: Wydawnictwo Un-iwersytetu Ekonomicznego we Wrocławiu.markowski, t. and marszał, t., 1999: Recovering econ-omy of a region in transition – the case of Łódź In-dustrial Agglomeration (Poland). In: European Spatial Research and Policy, Vol. 6, No. 1/1999.martin, r., 2012: Regional economic resilience, hyster-esis and recessionary shocks. In: Journal of Economic Geography, Volume 12, No. 1, pp. 1-32. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jeg/lbr019may, J., 2008: Adaptacja przedsiębiorstw przemysłowych – przykład Łodzi (Adaptation of industrial enterpris-es – the case of Lodz – in Polish). In: Zioło, L. and Rachwał, T. editors, Procesy transformacji układów przestrzennych przemysłu na tle zmieniającego się otoczenia, Prace Komisji Geografii Przemysłu Polsk-iego Towarzystwa Geograficznego, No. 10, Warszawa-Kraków, pp. 154-172.navarro-espigares, J.l and martín-Segura, J.a., 2012: The role of the service sector in regional economic resilience. The Resilience of the Global Service Econ-omy. In: The Service Industries Journal, Taylor & Fran-cis Group, Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 571-590. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02642069.2011.596535NBP, 2013: Narodowy Bank Polski (National Bank of Po-land – in Polish), http://www.nbp.pl Date of Access: 04-01-2014Państwowa Komisja Wyborcza (National Electoral Com-mission – in Polish), http://pkw.gov.pl Date of Access: 20-02-2014rachwał, t., 2011: Wpływ kryzysu na zmiany produk-cji przemysłowej w Polsce (The impact of crisis on changes in industrial production in Poland – in Polish). In: Zioło, Z. and Rachwał, T. editors, Wpływ kryzysu na zachowania przedsiębiorstw oraz przemi-any struktur regionalnych, Prace Komisji Geografii Przemysłu Polskiego Towarzystwa Geograficznego, No. 17, Warszawa-Kraków, pp. 99-113.Raport o stanie sektora małych i średnich przedsiębiorstw w Polsce (Report on the state of small and medium enterprises in Poland – in Polish), 2011: Warszawa: Polska Agencja Rozwoju Przedsiębiorczości.runge, J., 2007: Metody badań w geografii społeczno-ekonomicznej. Elementy metodologii, wybrane narzędzia badawcze (Research methods in socio-eco-nomic geography. Methodology elements, selected re-search tools – in Polish), Katowice: Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Śląskiego.Sagan, i. and masik, G., 2013: Economic Resilience. The Case Study of Pomorskie Region. In: Raumforschung und Raumordnung, Bericht aus Forschung and Pra-xis, Springer, Berlin. DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13147-013-0266-3Simmie, J. and martin, r., 2010: The economic resil-ience of regions: towards an evolutionary approach. In:  Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and So-ciety, Oxford University Press, Volume 3, Issue 1, pp. 27-43. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cjres/rsp029Smith, a., 1995: Regulation theory, strategies of enter-prise integration and the political economy of re-gional economic restructuring in Central and Eastern Europe: the case of Slovakia. In: Regional Studies, Vol-ume 29, Issue 8, pp. 761-772. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00343409512331349373Strategia Rozwoju Województwa Pomorskiego 2020 (Po-morskie Regional Development Strategy 2020 – in Polish), 2012: Gdańsk: Urząd Marszałkowski Wojew-ództwa Pomorskiego.Stryjakiewicz, t., 1999: Adaptacja przestrzenna przemysłu w Polsce w warunkach transformacji (Spa-tial adaptation of industry in Poland under transfor-mation – in Polish), Poznań: Wydawnistwo Naukowe UAM.Szmytkowska, m., masik, G. and rzepczyński, m., 2010: Trendy rozwoju oraz ocena jakości kapitału ludzkiego w województwie pomorskim (Trends and quality assessment of human capital in the Pomorsk-ie region – in Polish), Gdańsk: Urząd Marszałkowski Województwa Pomorskiego.Grzegorz Masik, Stanisław Rzyski / Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series 25 (2014): 129–141 141Świadek, a., 2012: Wielkość przedsiębiorstw i ich struk-tura własności a rozwój innowacyjności w regional-nych systemach przemysłowych (Size and ownership structure of enterprises versus development of inno-vations in the regional industrial systems – in Polish). In: Studia Regionalne i Lokalne, No. 1(47), Warszawa: Wydawnictwo Naukowe Scholar, pp. 5-23.The Economist, http://www.economist.com Date of Ac-cess: 18-11-2013Walker, D.f., 1975: A behavioral approach to industrial location. In: Collins, L. and Walker, D.F. editors, Lo-cation dynamics of manufacturing activity, New York: John Wiley, pp. 153-158© 2014 Nicolaus Copernicus University Press. All rights reserved.