Socio-Economic Practices of Resilience in Ireland

N
o
 
8
1
 
–
 
A
u
g
u
s
t
 
2
0
1
6
 
 
Socio-Economic Practices of 
Resilience in Ireland  
 
 
 Jennifer Dagg and Jane Gray 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N
I
R
S
A
 
W
o
r
k
i
n
g
 
P
a
p
e
r
 
S
e
r
i
e
s
 
 
Iontas Building, Maynooth  University,  
Maynooth, Co Kildare, Ireland. 
Áras Iontas, Ollscoil na hÉireann, Má Nuad,  
Má Nuad, Co Chill Dara, Éire.  
Tel: + 353 (0) 1 7083350 Fax: + 353 (0) 1 7086456 
Email: nirsa@nuim.ie  
Web: http://www.maynoothuniversity.ie/nirsa  
 
 
    
 
Abstract 
This working paper is a qualitative analysis of socio-economic practices of resilience 
in Irish households.  It was produced as the Irish national report for Work Package 4 
(D4.19) within the FP7 Project, ‘RESCuE: Patterns of resilience during socio-
economic crisis among households in Europe.’  The paper includes an overview of the 
socio-economic characteristics of participating households in Ireland.  It discusses the 
narratives of hardship provided by Irish participants and considers the varying 
practices adopted within households to cope with hardship.  It concludes with an 
analysis of the degrees of hardship and forms of resilience experienced and displayed 
across different household types, and discusses some of the limitations of the concept 
of resilience. 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommended citation: Dagg, J. and Gray, J. (2016) Socio-economic practices of 
resilience in Ireland. NIRSA Working Paper No. 81 (NIRSA, Maynooth, Ireland).  
Available at: https://www.maynoothuniversity.ie/social-sciences-institute/working-
papers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This project has received funding from the European Union's Seventh Framework 
Programme for research, technological development and demonstration under grant 
agreement number 613245. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
Contents 
 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 5 
2. Country specific literature review on socio-economic practices of coping with hardship or 
resilience .................................................................................................................................................... 6 
3. Socio-economic characteristics of HH participants ............................................................................... 8 
4. Narratives and dynamics of hardship .................................................................................................... 14 
Narratives of hardship: How households explain hardship ................................................................... 14 
Narratives of hardship affecting the whole household ...................................................................... 14 
Needs that affected children: ............................................................................................................. 20 
Narratives of hardship affecting young adults .................................................................................. 22 
Narratives of hardship linked to personal aspirations and desires ................................................... 23 
Impact of the community on household hardship ............................................................................. 23 
Impact of the 2008 crisis and related policy changes on household hardship ....................................... 25 
Other dynamics of hardship ................................................................................................................... 27 
Factors that are external and internal to the households in the emergence and/or persistence 
of hardship.  .................................. 28 
5. Practices of coping with hardship .......................................................................................................... 32 
Income generation, protection and stabilisation .................................................................................... 32 
Practices to manage or reduce cost of living ......................................................................................... 38 
The role of assets and resources ............................................................................................................ 42 
Extended family & friends ................................................................................................................. 42 
Costs, benefits and consequences of resilience ..................................................................................... 47 
6. Analysis of household resilience practices  and limitations of resilience analysis ................................ 49 
Degrees of hardship and different forms of resilience........................................................................... 49 
Resilience amongst the ‘very poor’ ................................................................................................... 49 
Resilience amongst the ‘poor’ ........................................................................................................... 50 
Resilience amongst ‘low income families with apparent deprivation’ .............................................. 50 
Resilience amongst ‘low-income families without apparent deprivation’ ........................................ 51 
Continuity and discontinuity in resilience ............................................................................................. 51 
Limitations of resilience analysis .......................................................................................................... 52 
Labour market developments and implications for resilience ........................................................... 52 
References: ............................................................................................................................................... 55 
Appendix One. ......................................................................................................................................... 57 
 
 4 
Fig. 1 Rural Household by family type ................................................................................................ 9 
Fig. 2 Urban Household by family type ............................................................................................... 9 
Fig 3: Employment status of household participants in urban and rural locations. ..................... 11 
Fig 4: Level of education of household participants in urban and rural locations. ....................... 12 
Figure 5: Ethnicity of rural and urban participants. ....................................................................... 12 
Fig 6: Housing status of rural and urban participants. ................................................................... 13 
 
 
 
  
 5 
Introduction 
 
The concept of resilience has attracted much academic and political interest of 
late and has recently been incorporated into the sociological literature 
(Dagdeviren et al., 2016). In contrast to the psychological or psycho-social 
literature, which emphasises individual or family traits, the sociological 
literature on resilience focuses up on the social, cultural and political context 
within which resilience occurs. Rather than heroic models of resilience where 
individuals are understood to perform extraordinary acts or achievements, 
sociological approaches take the socioeconomic and historical context into 
account and examine peoples’ everyday practices as they seek to improve their 
circumstances (Dagdevieren et al., 2016; Canvin et. al., 2009). The literature on 
resilience 'views adversity as a precondition, and then investigates what is 
involved in 'beating the odds' associated with such adversity' (Canvin et. 
al.,2009:239).  
 
The Irish participants in RESCuE suffered material deprivation and other forms 
of hardship to varying degrees as a result of the Financial Crisis in 2008. Their 
interviews revealed a bleak assessment of contemporary social conditions and 
an overwhelming sense of trepidation for their future potential and prosperity. In 
their interviews, participants gave voice to important reflections on their current 
state of being: a sense of being unfairly burdened with austerity measures, of 
facing cuts that have had the greatest impact at the lowest level; of a steady 
progression towards increasing poverty and hardship; a sense of insecurity for 
their future in regards to health, employment and providing for their children; 
the rising cost of daily essentials; and a perception of the mass exodus of young 
people from rural communities. Although participants attributed blame to the 
‘ordinary person,’ they also clearly felt that ordinary people were paying the 
price by living with reduced means. They placed the 'real' blame on government 
officials, bankers and developers, who remained responsible for a lack of action, 
negotiation, and general failure to meet the needs of the people in the post-crisis 
setting. These sentiments were emphasised most by self-employed people 
whose small businesses were failing.  
 6 
This report examines the socioeconomic practices of households in Ireland that 
have experienced adversity in the wake of the Financial Crisis of 2008 as 
follows: 
 Section 2 provides a summary of the socioeconomic context in Ireland 
after the crisis, as outlined in more detail in the National Report for 
WP2.  
 Section 3 describes the socioeconomic characteristics of participating 
households by family type, employment status, educational attainment, 
ethnicity, and housing status. 
 Section 4 discusses the narratives of hardship experienced by households 
in Ireland, distinguishing hardship that affected the whole household; 
that affected the needs of children; those of young adults; the personal 
aspirations and desires of interviewees; and the impact of community on 
households.  
 Section 5 considers the practices of coping with hardship by examining 
income generation and stabilisation; practices to manage and reduce 
consumption; the role of assets and resources; and the cost, benefits and 
consequences of resilience.  
 Section 6 provides an analysis of household resilience practices and the 
limitations of resilience analysis by considering the degrees of hardship 
and the different forms of resilience amongst different household types; 
continuity and discontinuity in resilience; and the limitations of 
resilience analysis.  
 2. Country specific literature review on socio-economic 
practices of coping with hardship or resilience  
 
As a recent report by the National, Economic and Social Council (2013:22) 
emphasized, the high proportions of people (22%) and more particularly 
children (24%) living in jobless households (Watson, Maître and Whelan 
2012:18-24), are key distinguishing features of the social consequences of the 
crisis in Ireland. Taken together with the changing gender composition of 
employment and increasing proportions of low-work intensity households, this 
 7 
feature of the Irish social landscape has considerable implications for 
understanding the conditions for household resilience.  
Qualitative research on the resilience practices of households is comparatively 
scant. Daly and Leonard (2002:2) carried out in-depth qualitative interviews 
with the members of thirty families living on low incomes in Dublin, with a 
view to making visible “the lives and concerns of some of Ireland’s poorest 
households.” Their research highlighted the extent to which “the welfare of the 
family as a unit needs to be addressed as do people’s social support networks 
and their embeddedness in their local area,” and they called for the prioritization 
of qualitative research in order “to look at the world, and public services and 
provision especially, through the eyes of poor people themselves” (Daly and 
Leonard 2002: 198-225). Their call was made in the context of the 
“congratulatory clamour” accompanying the years of economic success, and has 
subsequently remained largely unheard by Irish research commissioners.  
Olagnero et al. (2006) documented the extent to which poor residents of social 
housing in Dublin relied on extended family networks for social support.  
Similarly to Daly and Leonard (2002), the authors found that poor families felt 
relatively isolated from wider community networks. In a mixed-method study, 
Corcoran, Gray and Peillon (2010) found that household and community 
practices amongst residents of new suburbs in the greater Dublin varied 
according to family life stage, distance from extended family networks, and 
other socio-demographic aspects of the locality. In contrast to qualitative 
research on families in poor neighbourhoods, they found that middle-class 
families were embedded local non-kin networks, especially those whose 
children were of school-going age.   
 
The Community Platform (n.d.), a network of 30 national organisations working 
against poverty and inequality, recently issued a report on “the human stories 
behind poverty in Ireland, based on qualitative responses to the question: "how 
is the recession, and Government policy, affecting your life? The responses 
emphasized how people have been affected by the cumulative impact of 
unemployment or poorly paid employment, lack of opportunities and cuts to 
 8 
services and supports over successive years.  They also revealed the extent to 
which people were engaging in creative strategies to try to address the 
challenges they faced. 
 3. Socio-economic characteristics of HH participants 
 
We recruited participants from within the Midlands region.  This region 
experienced considerable population growth during the Celtic Tiger boom due 
to its position on the outer edge of the Dublin commuter belt. However, it 
displayed the lowest level of economic resilience to the crisis, with 
disproportionately high increases in rates of unemployment and mortgate arrears 
(Breathnach et al. 2014; NESC 2013). The region has urban and rural pockets of 
disadvantaged, and very disadvantaged, areas. In accordance with our sampling 
criteria, we interviewed families/households that were experiencing material 
adversity. Specifically, we identified individuals or families who were living in 
a disadvantaged area and who were: i) poor and on public benefits, but active 
and self-supporting - getting by better than others; ii) at risk of poverty but 
struggling to avoid it by various activities, iii) poor but not in benefit schemes 
due to various reasons, and getting by somehow; and iv) low-income working 
family households. The Irish RESCuE team completed twenty five household 
interviews in total; thirteen were from the urban research area, and twelve were 
from the rural research area.  
 
Couples with dependent children comprised the most common family 
household type (Figure 1 and 2), in both urban and rural areas. This is 
consistent with census data showing this household type to be the modal 
household type in each area.  In the rural area 8 of the participants were 
members of households comprising couples with children. There were three 
single participants, two of whom were living at home with their parents. One 
participant was a widow. In the urban area, six participants were living in 
households comprising couples with children, three were single and living in the 
parental home, 3 were single parent households, and 1 participant was a 
 9 
widow
1
. Amongst the urban participants, 1 lone parent had a child with autism, 
2 single participants and 1 widow had difficulties with alcohol, and 2 single 
participants had experienced homelessness.  
 
 
Fig. 1 Rural Household by family type 
 
 
Fig. 2 Urban Household by family type  
Since 2007 the deprivation rate has more than doubled in Ireland. In 2013, over 
30 percent of the population (more than one million people) experienced two or 
                                                 
1
 See appendix one for Participant Interviewed by Family Type 
0 1 2 3 4 5
Single adult living alone  
Couple  
Couple w/ dependent children 
and adult living at home  
Couple w/ dependent children 
Rural Household by Family Type 
0 1 2 3 4 5
Single parent w/ depdendent 
children living at home 
Couple w/ adult living at home 
Single adult living alone 
Couple w/ dependent children 
Single adult with adult living at home 
Single parent 
Urban  Household by Family Type 
 10 
more types of enforced deprivation. According to EU SILC for 2013 (CSO, 
2015) there have been notable increases in the proportions of Irish households 
that are unable to: replace worn out furniture (25.8%), afford a 
morning/afternoon/evening out (25.1%) and have family/friends over for a 
meal/drink (18.7%). For those ‘at risk of poverty’ the deprivation rate was 53.9 
percent in 2013 compared with 46.8 percent in 2012. The types of deprivation 
most commonly experienced were an inability to; replace worn out furniture 
(42.5%), afford a morning/afternoon/evening out (41.7%) and have 
family/friends over for a meal/drink (33.3%).  For those not ‘at risk of poverty’ 
the deprivation rate was 26.3 percent in 2013, compared with 23.0 percent in 
2012. The types of deprivation most commonly experienced were an inability 
to; replace worn out furniture (22.8%), afford a morning/afternoon/evening out 
(22.1%) and have family/friends over for a meal/drink (16.0%). 
Further analysis by socio-demographic characteristics showed that those living 
in households with one adult and one or more children had the highest 
deprivation rate in 2013 at 63.2 percent.  Those living in accommodation that 
was rented at below the market rate or rent free (56.6%), those describing their 
principal economic status as unemployed (54.9%) and those who were not at 
work due to illness or disability (53.1%) also had deprivation rates of over 50 
percent in 2013 (CSO, 2015).  
With regard to employment status (See Figure 3), most Irish RESCuE 
participants in both the urban and rural areas were in receipt of some form of 
social benefits, either job seekers benefit, jobseekers allowance, or disability 
benefit. Those in training were young people (n=5) who were early school 
leavers, or participants partaking in activiation schemes (n=2) following 
redundancy. Three of the particpants in the rural area were retired (one had 
taken early retirement in 2008). One participant was unemployed but not 
receiving social benefits as her husband was working full-time, while another 
was self-employed. Three of our participants were working. However, two of 
these were the only adult in full-time employment in their households.  
 
 11 
 
Fig 3: Employment status of household participants in urban and rural 
locations. 
 
The educational attainment (See Figure 4) of our participants varied 
considerably. The majority had completed either primary school education, 
which is generally completed at 12 years of age, or completed full secondary 
education, obtaining a Leaving Certificate or Leaving Certificate Applied (a 
vocational and practical oriented qualification). Two of our participants went 
on to secondary education but left within the first two years. Four had 
completed their Junior Certificate, the first round of state exams, generally 
undertaken at age 15. Three were three Early School Leavers, meaning that 
they had ceased participation in school before reaching the age of 16 years or 
before completing three years post-primary education, whichever is later. One 
participant received special needs education which entails provision of 
education in special schools dedicated to educating children with similar 
needs, or attached or integrated into mainstream schools. Three of our 
participants went on to complete third level education, one as a mature student. 
 
 12 
 
Fig 4: Level of education of household participants in urban and rural 
locations. 
 
In relation to ethnicity (See Figure 5), most participants were 'white Irish.' 
Members of the migrant and Traveller communities were also included. The 
migrant population of our study area is 3-6 percent of the total population 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Ethnicity of rural and urban participants. 
 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Full Primary
Less than Secondary
Secondary
Special Needs
Early School Leaver
Full Secondary
Vocational Education
University
Educational attainment 
 13 
Privately owned housing was the most common form of housing status (See 
Figure 6) with 10 of 25 participants paying a mortgage on their homes. Six 
participants were living in local authority social housing accommodation. Local 
authorities are the main providers of housing for people who cannot afford to 
buy their own home. Rent is payable to the local authority and is based upon the 
household’s ability to pay. However, there are extensive waiting lists for social 
housing in Ireland at present with an average wait of almost 5 years for housing 
to be made available to those in need. Social housing supply has been reduced 
since the collapse of the construction industry with, for instance, Dublin City 
Council building only 29 homes in 2013 with more than 16,000 people on its 
housing waiting list (Kelly, 2014 IT). Dublin city currently has 21,015 
individuals and families on their housing list with each one having been 
assessed for housing need. Dublin city housed 960 applicants last year (Kelly, 
2015 IT). The Government’s social housing strategy, published last November 
(2014), aims to eliminate social housing waiting lists by 2020. Applicants on 
social housing lists are generally living in the private rented sector with or 
without rent supplement. Of our 4 applicants in the private rented sector 3 were 
in receipt of rent supplement. 5 participants are living in the parental home 
contributing rent to the household each week.  
 
 
Fig 6: Housing status of rural and urban participants. 
 
 14 
4. Narratives and dynamics of hardship 
 Narratives of hardship: How households explain 
hardship  
 
In Ireland, household hardship is measured in terms of material deprivation 
which takes into account access to resources other than income. This allows us 
to explore what doing without means for those who are living with material 
adversity. Deprivation measures aim to capture the living conditions of 
households that cannot afford at least two items (enforced deprivation) from a 
list of deprivations considered necessary to attain a living standard considered 
acceptable to Irish society generally.  
Recent quantitative analysis of the deprivation rate in Ireland provides a 
background to the narratives of hardship experienced and discussed by our 
participants. With a reduction in their standard of living, households begin to 
redefine their consumption habits. As indicated in the qualitative report "Facing 
the crisis: the coping strategies of unemployed people in Europe" undertaken by 
the European Commission (2014), households begin by removing expenses they 
deem less essential: holidays, unexpected purchases, and replacing worn out 
items. It also found that households reduced their leisure activities as these were 
considered an unnecessary expense. At the opposite end, it found that the 
expenses that households sacrifice last are: pairs of properly fitting shoes, 
telephone and computer, paying arrears and bills (European Commission, 2014).  
In the paragraphs below, we summarize the narratives of hardship provided by 
our participants under the following headings: (i) deprivation that affected the 
whole family or household; (ii) unmet needs that affected children; (iii) 
deprivation experienced by young adults living in the parental home; (iv) 
individual participants’ accounts of their own unfulfilled desires; or (iv) impact 
of community on household hardship. 
Narratives of hardship affecting the whole household 
The most extreme forms of hardship described by our participants related to 
forms of material deprivation such as not being able to complete a weekly 
 15 
grocery shop, provide home heating oil for the household, or take a daily 
shower. Although all participants existed on stringent budgets, some prioritised 
paying the bills over weekly groceries. Participants living in these household 
circumstances spoke of shopping for food on a daily basis, of often buying food 
in ‘reduced price’ sections of the supermarket, of parents surviving on just one 
daily meal, or going without food entirely in order to ensure that there was 
enough for the children. 
Resp 1: We would work with what was there. If there is any meat left 
over or if there is any veg left over or whatever you would rustle up 
just a meal wouldn’t you *Jack*? 
Resp 2: Yeah you would just get something quick. We would do 
without breakfast and lunch. 
Resp 1: I would rather do without it. 
Resp 2: Yeah and just have the dinner. 
Resp 1: There is days there I wouldn’t eat at all. There was actually 
days there, there was one week there I didn’t eat for four days. I gave it 
to the kids instead and I gave it to him because he is at work and the 
kids need it for school. I didn’t eat, and I just told the kids I wasn’t 
hungry but I was but I just gave it to them instead" (INT.HU.007, 
Husband and wife, 4 children). 
 
In the rural study area one family spoke of surviving on eggs produced by the 
hens that they kept, supplemented with budget chips.  
 
"We lived on eggs. I remember the Aldi chips are great, for 2.5 kilo 
you can get €1.49 and we lived on chips and eggs or scrambled eggs or 
what way you can do eggs. Now I have spaghetti up there, they do 
spaghetti for €0.45 and a tin of that goes on chips, still shi* food from 
what I was on when you’re training. So things went really bad in the 
last few years" (INT.HR.002, Husband, 2 children). 
 
 16 
Home heating oil was unaffordable for the majority of households, with many 
participants talking of going without heating oil for several years. As most of 
the interviews took place over the winter months and in participant's homes, the 
pervasiveness of this form of deprivation became apparent to the researchers, 
whether participants mentioned it or not, as numb icy feet were commonplace 
by the end of a two hour interview. In one extreme case a family spoke of 
lighting the fire for 3 hours to heat the water so that all six family members, 
once a week, could share a single bath. As substitutes for home heating oil, 
participants spoke of gathering pallets from their workplace, breaking them up 
and placing them in the fire, turning towards charities for help, using family 
networks to secure turf (peat) for the winter in exchange for help ‘drawing in’ 
the turf during the summer months, or buying small oil cans to the value of €20 
at a time when they could afford it for the particularly cold winter nights.  
 
[T]hat's the oil tank. So that's the reality of it, there's €20 you put in it 
from a can, you know it won't last, it just gives you a bit of heat in the 
night or whenever. So a few times I've gone just to get oil like that. The 
big thing I suppose, with the money gone, is how do you keep your 
children warm? And that's where it's just heartbreaking. I was thinking 
about Christmas before there, trying to get them a present, you know, 
people you love.  To do the basics, keep them warm..." 
(INT.HRPE.002, husband, 2 children). 
Not being able to afford a family holiday was another common form of hardship 
described by participants across all socio-demographic categories. Especially 
amongst couples with children, family holidays were either never possible, or 
had been curtailed because of the crisis. For example, consider the narratives 
below from a low work intensity household with four children who have never 
been on a family holiday.  The mother described how she feels for her children 
returning to school after the summer holidays, unable to join in with 
conversations amongst their peers about what they did, or where they went over 
the holiday period. 
 17 
[T]hey need, like they go into school after the summer holidays and all 
the friends - oh we were here, or we were here, and then my little one 
and another little girl 'we didn’t go anywhere’ and that’s the whole 
time, so it does get to you after so many times of saying 'oh we didn’t 
get anywhere, we couldn’t go anywhere' (INT.HU.007, husband and 
wife, 4 children). 
Similarly, a young adult living in the parental home talked about how she and 
her family used to go on holiday together, but that this has not been the case in 
recent years.  
Yeah, we used to. Haven't been on a holiday now in a while, but we 
used to like, a few years back like. We used to always go, because we 
used to have one of those - not caravan - what do you call the other 
thing? Mobile home thing, I don't know what it is, you drive it anyway 
and you can sleep in the back" (INT.HR.009, single living in family 
home). 
Lastly, a couple with adult children described how they no can no longer afford 
to go on holiday since the crisis, although this used to be a common practice. 
Now, their children occasionally pool their resources to gift them a holiday or 
weekend away. 
[If] we have a wee holiday or a weekend away the kids pay for it. We 
haven’t had a weekend away or anything in the last five years, four 
years, since 2010/2009, I can’t remember, it’s a long time ago anyway, 
we used to go away regularly" (INT.HR.006, husband, grown children 
not living in family home).   
 
The accounts above illustrate the strains that families face, but also the 
challenge of defining and describing resilient outcomes. Recognition of 
resilience involves measures of social well-being that enable families to 
improve forms of deprivation that hinder their quality of life (NESC, 2013: vii). 
Faced with situations of hardship, the small local outings that families took 
 18 
together were highly significant for the well-being and quality of life of the 
whole family. For instance, participants in families where holidays were 
financially impossible spoke of time spent together using public resources 
within their locality. Local woodlands and lakes are prized amenities that 
families described as viable alternatives to holidays in the sense of providing 
amusement, entertainment, curiosity and quality family time. For example, one 
participant talks about the neighbouring woodland as a playground for his 
young children, although he is conscious of being unable to afford the 
alternative of an established family entertainment.  
 
But it has been great peace of mind, you know, going out and that quiet 
time, you know with the kids, and sit with the kids, and playing, but 
you know...so it has been that kind of a thing, like I said, there's bears, 
and we'd be looking for this now with kids, we've played chasing, hide 
and go seek with the other kids, and other times I'd go off and hide 
from them, you know, there's all different things we've done,[...], like 
it's been a playground, this wood, it's been an adventure place, and it 
was a bit of out...and it's sad that that was your outing as well, well we 
can't go to *names family entertainment centre* and we can't go here, 
I've no money.  Everything was money [...], you know there's good 
parts and bad parts, but you know when it's sad in other parts where 
this is your fun. But we made it fun" (INT.HR.002, Husband, 2 
children). 
 
Another participant talks similarly about entertaining her children using the 
local playground or woodland, emphasising the attraction of events that are free 
or of little cost.  
 
Or, like that, bringing the kids to the forest. We do a lot of things with 
the kids like bring them to the playground or the forest when it’s nice 
out, we do things that wouldn’t cost as much... 
 19 
...like that we’d go to the forest for a walk with the kids and walk for an 
hour and then go and get ice cream and bring it back to the house" 
(INT.HU.004, wife, 2 children)  
 
Our younger adult participants also spoke of using local communal resources as 
areas of relaxation and fun.  
 
I'd use the lakes now, as it is now.  I mean I go out in the summer, I 
just chill out at the lake.  There's a diving board out there in *name of 
lake*, so you go out there and have a swim and shout in the sun mainly 
and stuff you know" (INT.HU.012, Single, living in family home). 
 
Home renovation was another common theme relating to hardship in our 
participants’ narratives.  Many spoke about not being able to maintain their 
home to a presentable and hospitable standard, or replace appliances once they 
became faulty or broken. For families living in social housing replacing broken 
appliances such as a washing machine poses an enormous financial burden 
because, in contrast to private tenancies the local council is not responsible for 
repairing or replacing them. This is exacerbated in households with children 
where washing clothes – such as school uniforms – is a daily essential. For 
example, a lone parent living in social housing with three children described 
how her washing machine just kept on breaking. She did not have the means to 
replace it outright and so turned to purchasing one on rental.  
 
Another couple, who bought their current house in 2007, spoke of being unable 
to afford the renovations it desperately needs, to the extent that they do not 
invite anyone into their home out of shame.  
 
This is our home now yeah. Yeah but the thing is, it’s there, to me it’s 
just bricks, it’s not even a house because I can’t do anything in it, I 
don’t have the money to do anything in it. You couldn’t bring anyone 
into it. Basically there is a lot of things I would like to do with it" 
(INT.HU.007, husband and wife, 4 children). 
 20 
 
Where renovations needed to be carried out male participants spoke of 
undertaking DIY jobs in what spare time they had, with carpentry or tiling skills 
often learned from a previous generation. In one house the kitchen floor has 
remained bare concrete for at least two years as the family try to save the price 
of adhesive to stick down the tiles. However, the participant proudly showed us 
the work that he has completed so far, getting the walls painted and fitting 
kitchen units, while his wife has managed to source a lot of the household 
furniture from local charity shops.  
 
That is into the kitchen. I have tiles and everything for the floor but I 
just don't have the money to get the adhesive for it so I am saving up a 
bit. 
And how long do you have the tiles? 
Two years now, there was a deal but I just didn't have enough for the 
adhesive at the same time. But I got the wall done and the doors of the 
units" (INT.HU.007, husband and wife, 4 children) 
 
Finally, participants talked about the difficulties associated with the day to day 
running costs of a household with children, from not being able to put petrol in 
the car, to being unable to treat the children to simple gifts, and being unable to 
save and plan for the future.  
 
However, in tandem with these examples of day-to-day hardship, participants 
also talked of the necessity of strict budgets and of their budgeting skills, their 
awareness of the need to compromise, of prioritising the children's needs over 
their own, and of using social resources or charities to assist in negotiating, or 
achieving, desirable outcomes.  
  
 Needs that affected children 
Amongst households with children, the lack of financial resources to provide for 
their education and development were prominent themes. Parents expressed 
concern, not just because they felt they were depriving their children of their 
 21 
potential through lack of resources, but also because they believed their children 
were aware of how their household circumstances were limiting their life 
chances. Being unable to provide the opportunity for their children to take part 
in extra-curricular or leisure activities was a source of worry and emotional 
hardship for participants.  
 
For example, one participant describes how she would love for one of her 
children to return to horse riding classes and for another to return to swimming 
classes, but she is just unable to meet their cost and is also hindered by the 
absence of transport.  
 
It is tough like *Emma* now would like to go back horse riding which 
I don’t mind, I would love to let her go back but then there is the cost 
factor of that number one and because I have no way of getting her out 
number two. You can’t do that. The little one wanted to go swimming 
there last year, I tried to get her in but it was working out at €56 every 
couple of weeks and I wouldn’t have it.  There is things they want to do 
and I can’t, I don’t have the resources to give it to them which is tough. 
If I could give it to them I would” (INT.HU.007, husband and wife, 4 
children). 
 
Some extra-curricular activities have become an integral part of the ‘hidden’ 
primary school curriculum. However, since the costs are not included in state 
payments to the schools, increasing pressure is placed on parents to make 
financial contributions so that their children can participate (Holden, 2013). 
 
Participants also spoke about the direct cost of educating their children. 
Although in Ireland education is nominally ‘free’ through third level, there is 
little support for the practical everyday costs of uniforms, books, stationary, or 
food, nor for the extra-curricular activities that schools now encourage. The 
challenge of meeting these costs can be compounded by the expense of making 
a religious sacrament or taking a state exam. Primary schools request a 
‘voluntary’ contribution fee that ranges between €50 and €250. Secondary 
 22 
education requires contributions towards certain practical subjects such as home 
economics, woodwork or engineering. Parents must also pay for the correction 
of ‘mock’ examination papers and a fee to the State for their children to sit the 
Junior and Leaving Certificates. As a consequence of the crisis schools are 
under increasing budget pressure which they then pass on to parents (Barnardos, 
2015)  
 
This year I have her mocks so I’ll pay that in January, that’s €135. 
Then when she went back to school, she’s in *name of secondary 
school*, they were sending out - you need this exam paper, you need 
that exam paper. There is always something. I had to spend €20 a week 
for 3 or 4 weeks even after the money spent after her going in, and then 
with *Enda* it’s like school fees, his was €110, it’s ridiculous the price 
of stuff. Every week you’re getting a text message off the school. But 
they are constantly putting pressure on you" (INT.HU.001, lone parent 
with children) 
Parents did not challenge or contest schools’ demands for additional payments 
or the education policy that fails to provide sufficient funds.  Instead, they 
interacted with community and charity organisations to help ease their burden in 
other areas, reducing their consumption habits, or compromising other priorities 
in order to continue to provide the essentials for their children’s education.  
  
Narratives of hardship affecting young adults 
The young people we spoke with, aged between 18-21 years, all lived in the 
family home. Each participant interviewed gave between €40-€60 weekly to the 
household budget, to contribute to costs such as rent and upkeep. Within this 
group deprivation was experienced as a state of limbo. They could not afford to 
move out of the family home because private rental accommodation was 
unaffordable but staying at home meant that they remained a cost to their 
parents who, they felt, were struggling already. Furthermore, as part of a post-
crisis austerity measure, unemployed persons under the age of 25 now receive a 
 23 
social benefit of just €100 per week, considerably lower than the standard €188 
per week.  
 
One young adult with younger siblings talked about how he feels a burden on 
his mother. Although by staying at home he is contributing to the household 
income, he is trying to save to move out. 
[I]t’s not realistic for me to go, move out like in a way, you know.  So 
it's a hard situation.  I was thinking now the past year of leaving, and 
I'm thinking it's about time I get going, you know, but then like what's 
the story with her rent, and what's the story with the thing, because the 
rent'll be the same anyways you know, and if she's half struggling now 
with me paying the money to her, what's she going to be doing after?  
And then me getting by on what I have on my own wouldn't really 
work either, so it's a tough situation, it's a hard situation.  It is about 
time I got going but... (INT.HU.012, single, living in family home).  
Although young people are caught in the predicament of not being able to move 
out of the family home, many were hopeful of their ability to improve their 
future lives by progressing either to further education or some form of 
employment.  
 
 Narratives of hardship linked to personal aspirations and desires 
At an individual level, female participants in particular, spoke of unfulfilled 
personal desires. These were articulated most commonly by women who were 
not in employment, who spoke of their wish to have a job, and to have financial 
independence. However, their absence of feasible childcare options, or lack of 
afterschool care in the case of children suffering a disability or illness, restricted 
these possibilities.  
 
 Impact of the community on household hardship 
Lastly, we found that the community in which participants lived had an impact 
on their household hardship. Households living in urban designated 
 24 
disadvantaged areas spoke of being exposed to vandalism and theft of personal 
property, of anti-social behaviour, of children being bullied, exclusion within 
the community, and rival feuds. Hardship was felt not only in financial terms, 
having to replace stolen items or repair broken property, but also in terms of the 
impact of situations such as bullying. One participant talked about the impact 
bullying had on her and her son and about moving out of the area altogether. 
 
It was in *disadvantaged area*, what age was he, he was about 5. Now 
he was about 4 when he started school. There was people that lived up 
there beside us, and they were in his class in school and they were 
home and they were actually a set of twins and he spent time in 
hospital, couldn’t let him outside the door so I had to actually had to 
put myself in debt to get playstation games and things like that to keep 
him in. He was putting on so much weight then because I was keeping 
him in. It was very hard, I had enough of it. It was either put myself in 
debt or go renting a house out here so I did" (INT.HR.001, wife, 3 
children). 
 
Similarly, members of another household discussed the isolation their 
family feel within their community, a lack of conviviality and support 
resulting from a serious misunderstanding by community members. 
 
Resp 1: One incident there happened afterwards. I was out playing with 
the kids which I do, I’ll fall down and let them bounce off me and like 
at that time, not now that they are teenagers but that time it was great, 
they were bouncing off me and everything and someone up there 
reported me for thinking I was too rough with them in the field. I 
would run over and fall over them and they would think that was great 
because I fell and they would jump on me but someone reported me for 
saying I was physically hurting the kids out in the field. That hit me, 
that hit me hard. 
How long had you been living there? 
Resp 1: We were only a few months weren’t we, about a year? 
 25 
Resp 2: Yeah.  It’s horrible up there. The neighbours are just horrible. 
Resp 1: Then you hear the stories back that they are not, they are 
talking about you and there is a feud going on with another family up 
this other side and then others are talking about them. 
Resp 2: There is no communication. There is no niceness about them at 
all (INT.HU.007, husband and wife, 4 children). 
 
As aforementioned, the most common quantitative indicators of deprivation are 
an inability to replace worn out furniture or maintain an active social life 
through going out to meet friends or entertaining family and friends. While the 
majority of our participants (particularly couples with children) discussed going 
out less, or spending less on entertainment as an almost immediate result of the 
crisis, such cutbacks were not to the fore in our participants’ accounts of their 
lived experiences. Deprivation that affected the well-being of the whole family 
or household, the needs of children, the present predicament of young people, a 
personal sense of life expectation, and their community environment, were all at 
the forefront of our participants narratives of hardship.  
 
Impact of the 2008 crisis and related policy changes on    
household hardship  
 
Cuts in public expenditure, increased taxation, and unemployment have affected 
most people and households in Irish society. Our participants’ households 
suffered the impact of the crisis through redundancies, debt, lack of employment 
opportunities, availability of credit, and negative equity. A number of 
participants were significantly affected by the withdrawal of credit from the 
banking sector to households and small businesses. The removal of this crucial 
support resulted in a feeling of abandonment and a heightened sense of 
responsibility for the debt accrued during the boom years. This scenario is well 
documented by one participant who ran a small business with her husband. 
Their access to credit went from being virtually immediate during the Celtic 
Tiger, to having no access whatsoever for the foreseeable future. 
 26 
You can't just blame the banks.  I wish I could...well I do blame them 
to a certain extent because they were throwing money at people. I mean 
we had the banks ringing us asking us did we want to go on holiday's 
and asking us did we need money. Like really? That's just stupid, 
stupid, stupid. Looking back it's stupid but then we were stupid. Like 
we didn't think of the future, you didn't think of...you thought of now. 
We wanted to go on holidays so *Adam* used his card to book the 
holiday, you know? If we wanted a car we had a new car a week later. 
You know, stupid things like that" (INT.HR.012, wife, 4 children). 
 
For some, being made redundant removed a support that was about more than 
money. Especially amongst our female participants, having a job was a lifeline 
beyond the household; it gave them their own time separate from their familial 
obligations, and financial freedom through income that they felt was disposable, 
their own to spend as they chose.  
 
Debt that accrued within the construction sector through unpaid bills had a 
massive impact at the level of some households. For example, one of our 
participants, a skilled carpenter who honed his skills and worked as a foreman 
on construction projects valued in millions during the Celtic Tiger, set up his 
own business pre-Crisis. Over the course of 6 years four significant renovation 
projects completed by this participant resulted in incomplete payments by his 
clients. They simply refused to pay him, although the work was completed to a 
high standard. These outstanding payments accumulated to a substantial amount 
of household debt for this self-employed participant. This in turn had a 
significant knock-on effect on his health, leading him to suffer from clinical 
depression. 
 
Policy changes that impacted on the participants’ households included cuts to 
social benefits, reduction in salaries in the public sector, cuts to funding in the 
areas of health and education, and the introduction of new taxes such as the 
property tax and water charges. In these circumstances resilience may arise from 
competence in everyday situations, coping with the day-to-day running of a 
 27 
household when one's resources have been restricted. For instance, in the wake 
of cuts to funding in healthcare, families are left to meet the shortfall of 
services. One participant told us about her request for help from the Health 
Service Executive to meet the specific needs of her autistic child: 
Like I went to the clinic loads of times with *Peter*, he needs a 
weighted blanket and they’re £200 to buy and the HSE can’t get the 
funding for it because of all the cuts, so I went over and asked would 
they give me any help towards it and I was more or less told to go 
away, do you know what I mean" (INT.HU.001, lone parent, 3 
children). 
Similarly, coping with increasing cuts in social benefits generates more pressure 
on families’ ability to budget and manage the weekly incomings and outgoings.  
 
 Other dynamics of hardship 
 
The majority of households we interviewed suffered over-indebtedness. 
Nationally, over-indebtedness typically leads to the following outcomes for Irish 
households: 
 Being in arrears on housing/rent payments or utility bills or hire-
purchase/loan repayments or other bills on more than one occasion in 
the preceding 12 months, and  
 Considering their housing costs or loan repayments to be a heavy 
burden, and  
 Being unable to raise money to deal with an unexpected expense 
(Russell and Maitre, 2011). 
 Our research revealed a ‘hidden’ form of hardship associated with over-
indebtedness, namely, a sense of abandonment and a bleak outlook for the 
future amongst participants, both for themselves and for their children. They 
considered the situation they are currently facing as having created generational 
disadvantage. While they may be doing all they can to ensure the survival of 
their family by providing sustenance on a day-to-day level, they will never 
 28 
achieve advantage or surplus, in the sense of being able to provide opportunity 
for their children to excel. Their perception of having accumulated little worth 
to pass on to their children strikingly increased their sense of hardship.  
Recent research has revealed a change in the composition of those living in 
poverty in Ireland as a result of downward mobility (Savage et al. 2015).  We 
found that those whose families had experienced long-term disadvantage could 
avail of a stock of tacit knowledge enabling them to better cope with adversity. 
They managed to interact with public services relatively quickly and easily, 
activating their entitlements in order to provide support and stability. They often 
referred to similar circumstances amongst family members or within the 
community, revealing the value of shared information. These participants coped 
far better than those who were facing hardship for the first time, such as self-
employed people who had lost their business, or those who lost their job in the 
construction sector and were unable to regain employment. These newly 
impoverished groups appeared less able to navigate the system.  First, they were 
unfamiliar with the appropriate service to approach for the type of support they 
required. Secondly, they lacked experience of the public services that provide 
support, advocacy or welfare assistance in times of hardship. Thirdly, they did 
not know how to articulate their story to service providers, or how to negotiate 
their circumstances in order to achieve a successful outcome. Often they spoke 
of ‘telling the truth’ as a way of trying to evoke empathy for their case. 
However, having your form filled out correctly and the appropriate 
documentation may be more likely to lead to a successful outcome in these 
situations. 
  
Factors that are external and internal to the households 
in the emergence and/or persistence of hardship. 
   
External factors that contributed to household hardship amongst those we 
interviewed included: redundancy; the absence of employment opportunities; a 
fall off in business trade, small business closure, and funding cuts. For many 
small businesses the fall off in business trade was gradual over the period of 
 29 
years. For example a couple who ran a pub in a rural location reflected on how 
the waning construction industry and lack of further employment opportunities 
eventually had a direct impact on their trade, resulting in the closure of their 
business. 
 
Well the buildings. A lot of our customers in the pub would have been 
in construction. Like 90% of them would have been in construction. 
*Adam* himself was in construction and he noticed...we noticed like 
somebody come in they'd be let go. Like if somebody had come in ten 
years beforehand and said they'd been let go they would be working the 
following week. You know, the ability to get a job because there was 
so much work around, and like one of our regular customers, he 
practically lived in the pub because he was divorced and he had nobody 
living with him so he'd be in the pub all the time. He came in and said 
he'd after been let go. The man had never been out of work, like never. 
I remember sitting and looking and thinking; 'ah sure God you'll get 
something else *Jim*'.  'No' he says; 'there's nothing out there'. The 
people had to let him go because they had no work and that's what 
happened with everybody and then it happened with *Adam's* brothers 
and then my brother" (INT.HR.012, wife, 4 children).  
 
Internal factors leading to hardship included the age of the participant when 
made redundant and the fear that he or she would not succeed in finding another 
position. Relationship breakdown was a recurring source of hardship that put 
strain on a household, particularly where this included children, or required the 
division of assets. In these cases participants spoke of steps that they had taken 
to rebuild stability for themselves and their children, often involving family and 
community support. For some, this meant engaging with counselling services to 
talk through the grief or blame that comes with the loss of a partner; for others, 
it entailed securing work and financial stability for the household in the absence 
of sustained income, or involving family members further in the care of their 
children. Illness or death of family members emerged as the most prominent 
internal factor leading to hardship for households. Households where there was 
 30 
more than one child suffering an illness described the constant sequence of 
doctor's appointments and the need to consistently engage with health services. 
One family described how almost all family members had suffered illness in the 
months prior to Christmas. This was followed early in the New Year by the 
father of the household suffering a heart attack. 
*Susan* was in hospital in October as well, she has problems with her 
ovaries and *John* ended up, he got his appendix out just before 
Christmas. We had just got himself sorted, he had got his stitches out, 
they were all sick just before Christmas and we thought the Friday 
before Christmas we had just got the steroids for the little one, she gets 
them when her chest is bad and we got everything on the Friday before 
thinking we were set up. We were laughing, the GP is brilliant 
unfortunately she left last Friday but she gave us a list of stuff, this is 
just in case because she knows we practically have an appointment 
every week in the GP’s and on the Friday then *John* was in 
psychology on the Friday and we were told to go home and enjoy 
Christmas and we brought him in to get his stitches out and thinking 
we were brilliant and Saturday we were in A&E, it was that quick. He 
got his appendix out then on the Sunday, we only seemed to get over 
one thing and something else happened" (INT.HR.003, husband and 
wife, 4 children).  
 
Rather than capitulating in the face of multiple and successive household 
illnesses, both parents talked of a weekly schedule that is oriented around their 
children's respective appointments, their active engagement with a variety of 
health services in order to ensure that their children are receiving the necessary 
care, all of which reinforced a sense of solidarity and support amongst family 
members.  Similarly, a lone parent of three, who had left school when she 
became pregnant at the age of 17, had a child diagnosed with autism. She has 
spent a great deal of time and energy trying to access appropriate services for 
her son and to learn about his illness through support groups and  from other 
mothers of children with autism.  
 31 
 
Household hardship was exacerbated when internal and external factors 
converged, for example when households experienced unemployment alongside 
illness, particularly mental illness such as depression. In many cases depression 
was triggered by the stress of job loss and household debt. This is illustrated in 
the narrative of a participant who suffered clinical depression when his business 
folded, resulting in what he considered insurmountable debt, which transferred 
to his household and family.  
 At this stage now I was going through clinical depression because the 
doctor was treating me and I was on these, and only for my wife I 
probably would have committed suicide... 
...After eleven months of that and *Rebecca* trying to get me out of 
depression which she was fighting with me every day to not end up 
committing suicide because I thought logically if I commit suicide 
she’ll get the insurance and the house is paid.... 
...And there’s no more worries, worries are all gone. The kids will be 
well looked after because we have a big death policy so we would have 
got around €150,000 and everybody would have been looked after and 
I would be no more worries, that was my logic but no she wouldn’t 
have that so I ended up going to a psychiatrist as well and he talked to 
me, but I found my own doctor better" (INT.HR.006, husband, grown 
children not living in family home). 
 
Another participant had to leave the room during our interview and take some 
time out in his shed. His wife explains that he needs to take this time for himself 
every now and again when he becomes overwhelmed by their circumstances, 
and today it is because he is trying to negotiate a disability payment with the 
social welfare office, which he has been denied up to now.  
 
 
Resp 1: I’m heading out for a minute.  
 32 
Resp 2: He’s not one for sitting still. He never was one for sitting and 
he found it hard yesterday in that meeting, he nearly lost it. I’d say he’s 
actually upset now and he just needs to get out for a bit.  
I’m sorry I don’t want to be bringing stuff up for people. 
Resp 1: No but it’s not even bringing it up, it’s there the whole time 
and even yesterday he had to..basically he died and to actually say right 
no one is willing to look after him and they’re only putting more 
pressure on him and he said it was so degrading for him yesterday 
because he said he was just sitting in there trying to get what you are 
entitled to" (INT.HR.002, Husband and wife, 4 children). 
 
Those who suffered difficulties with alcohol all described the convergence of 
internal and external sources of hardship. For some, personal issues were 
exacerbated by the loss of employment and a turn towards alcohol to fill the loss 
of daily structure and counteract boredom. For others, experience of sexual 
abuse resulted in the turn towards alcohol addiction. Young people with parents 
who suffered difficulties described various forms of hardship including moving 
homes multiple times, the poor start they felt they had because of the problems 
their parents faced, relationship breakdown, and in one case, the death of parent 
related to alcohol addiction.  
5. Practices of coping with hardship  
Income generation, protection and stabilisation  
 
Ireland experienced a catastrophic fall in employment as a result of the crisis. 
As shown in Figure 3, above, the majority of our participants were in receipt of 
social benefits, and so welfare support was a frequent and important topic of 
discussion in the household interviews. Social benefits provided a financial 
lifeline for participants who became unemployed; those who suffered 
relationship breakdown resulting, in certain cases, in their designation as lone 
parent; those who suffered illness and required disability payment, or carer's 
allowance in the case of ill children. However, although participants were in 
receipt of social benefits due to them, many described difficult scenarios where, 
for instance, they needed an exceptional needs payment but were denied, or the 
 33 
dilemma of being reliant on the support of social benefits but unable to escape 
dependence on welfare because of the difficulty of combining work and 
childcare. Others described how difficult it was to qualify for social benefit 
support in the first place, particularly when the household had been dependent 
on a self-employed male breadwinner who therefore did not have enough social 
insurance contributions to qualify for support in the event of job loss.  
The importance of Child Benefit (a universal allowance to all parents or 
guardians of children younger than 16 years) to overall household income was 
also evident in the interviews. For example, the interviewee from a household 
with one adult working full-time and four children emphasized the importance 
of Child Benefit, particularly as she does not receive any other social benefits 
because her husband is working. She feels unable to work because each of her 
four young children have a variety of health problems, so that in this 
household maintaining a low income is a priority in order to qualify for the 
medical card which subsidizes the children’s health care. In this context, the 
Child Benefit payment is essential to cover everyday expenses:  
 
All I have coming in is children’s allowance, and that’s gone because 
when that comes in on the 5th of every month the car loan goes out of 
that which is €240 and the house insurance goes out which is another 
€60. Then you have your life insurance so you are left with about, last 
month we were left with €27 in it before I could take it out so I don’t 
have anything. That’s what I’m saying I don’t…" (INT.HU.007, couple 
with children) 
 
The Irish state has increasingly emphasized 'active unemployment', or activation 
policies, since the 'Troika agreement'. The Pathways to Work policy was first 
introduced in 2012, initiating sanctions if individuals did not comply with job-
search or participation in required labour market programmes (NESC, 2013:2). 
For some, this means taking up places on Community Employment or 
placement schemes under the Tús programme, or availing of back to education 
placements. Although some participants described activation policies as simply 
 34 
'taking me from one part of social welfare to another part of social welfare', 
others appreciated the structured time beyond the home, the interaction with 
others, and the vision of the future that participation in such courses or work 
programmes often initiated.  
Those in receipt of social benefits also spoke of the restrictions that receiving 
such benefits placed on them, including accessing the labour market when 
working hours were limited to 15 or 19.5 hours per week. Female participants, 
in particular, mentioned both the dearth and cost of childcare, or the fear of 
losing one of their benefit payments such as the medical card should they take 
up work.  
 
Participants in paid formal employment were often in precarious, low-paid, or 
part-time work situations. Participants whose family circumstances permitted 
them to work were actively engaged in seeking employment. However, overall 
there was a lack of stability of formal employment as participants described 
stints of work, then time back in receipt of social benefits before finding stints 
of work once more.  
 
Like *Adam* got...five weeks ago *Adam* got a job and it was a 
proper full-time paying job. €600 a week and for four weeks it was 
heaven. We were both working. It just felt like we were finally after all 
these years...it was the first time in nearly eight years that the two of us 
were working in proper full-time employment...everything above 
board. A chance to start having a better life and last week he got let go. 
There wasn't enough work. I went down to 24 hours a week so say 
about 200 Euro a week" (INT.HR.012, couple with children). 
 
Paid informal work, such as working in the home, or 'cash-in-hand' jobs were 
commonplace amongst those in very low-work intensity households, single 
parent households, and amongst young people. Examples such as hair-dressing 
from home, or doing small manual jobs provided much needed supplementary 
income for young people. These jobs were mainly sourced through their 
 35 
network of family and friends (never undertaken with strangers). However, 
these incidences of informal work were all described as sporadic, unable to be 
relied upon in any formal manner nor were they undertaken on a long-term 
basis. For some participants, these sporadic jobs were essential in order to 
supplement their incomes, for others they provided the chance to have an 
evening out to celebrate a particular occasion.  
 
Unpaid exchanges of labour (forms of bartering) were evident amongst those 
living in rural communities. Often family members liv