THE EFFECT OF THE PUBLIC RELATIONS ROLE FOR HANDLING COVID-19 AND NATIONAL ECONOMIC RECOVERY ON THE ADAPTATION OF NEW HABITS AMONG JAKARTA PEOPLE DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

223ABSTRACTMERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 20221Ahmad Fachrul Ali, 2Yoyoh Hereyah1	2Mercu	Buana	UniversityAuthor	correspondence:	ahmadfachrulali@gmail.comTHE EFFECT OF THE PUBLIC RELATIONS ROLE FOR HANDLING COVID-19 AND NATIONAL ECONOMIC RECOVERY ON THE ADAPTATION OF NEW HABITS AMONG JAKARTA PEOPLE DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMICThe	importance	of	the	Committee	for	Handling	Covid-19	and	National	Economic	Recovery	(KPCPEN)	plays	the	role	of	Public	Relations	in	the	adaptation	process	the	new	habits	of	Indonesian	society,	especially	Jakarta,	are	very	critical.	The	challenges	faced	by	KPCPEN	in	encouraging	the	adaptation	of	this	behavior	require	a	good	Public	Relations	strategy.	In	this	study,	a	study	was	conducted	on	the	role	of	Public	Relations	carried	out	by	KPCPEN	on	the	adaptation	of	new	habits	of	the	people	of	Jakarta.	The	purpose	of	this	study	is	to	find	out	whether	there	is	an	influence	on	the	role	of	Public	Relations	carried	out	by	KPCPEN	in	the	process	of	adapting	to	new	habits.	The	results	showed	that	there	was	a	significant	influence	of	the	role	of	Public	Relations	carried	out	by	KPCPEN	on	the	adaptation	of	new	habits	of	the	people	of	Jakarta.	In	the	crisis	conditions	faced,	KPCPEN	can	overcome	problems	to	encour-age	people	 to	adopt	new	habitual	behaviors	 that	are	very	 important	during	 the	Covid-19	pandemic	and	in	the	future.Keywords: public relations; behavioural adoption; Covid -19 pandemicINTRODUCTIONNot	 finished	 facing	 the	 infodemic	 in	 the	 community,	where	 accurate	 information	 is	mixed	with	misinformation,	resulting	in	a	decrease	in	public	trust,	in	early	2020	the	Indo-nesian	people	were	faced	with	a	complex	problem,	namely	the	Covid	-19	pandemic	that	is	sweeping	the	world.	Covid	-19	(Corona	Virus	Diseases	–	2019),	is	the	official	name	of	the	disease	identified	by	the	World	Health	Organization	(WHO),	bringing	people	to	uncomfort-able	conditions.	The	Covid-19	pandemic	affected	not	only	public	health	but	also	economic	conditions,	where	the	economy	was	stopped	due	to	the	severity	of	the	Covid	-19	pandemic	situation.	People	who	 rely	on	daily	 income	become	confused	and	worried	because	eco-nomic	activity	has	stopped	to	maintain	health	in	the	face	of	the	Covid	-19	pandemic.	224MERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 2022SOCIETY EMPOWERMENT AMIDST THE NEW NORMALTo	be	able	to	help	the	community	face	and	go	through	the	Covid-19	pandemic	effec-tively,	the	Indonesian	government	has	formed	a	committee	aimed	at	implementing,	super-vising,	ensuring,	and	taking	policies	to	deal	with	the	Covid-19	pandemic	and	the	national	economic	recovery	faster,	so	that	it	can	immediately	rise	from	these	conditions	so	that	the	nation’s	growth	can	proceed	as	planned.	With	 these	situations	and	conditions	come	 the	challenges	of	public	communication.	As	is	also	the	case	in	various	parts	of	the	world,	for	example,	 regarding	the	term	social	distancing,	our	society	also	 interprets	 it	as	social	dis-tancing,	creating	a	tendency	to	close	itself	socially.	As	a	result,	WHO	must	urge	the	world	to	change	the	use	of	the	term	so	as	not	to	understand	that	to	avoid	Covid-19	people	must	cut	off	social	contact	with	others.	Therefore,	the	use	of	the	term	‘Physical	Distancing’	is	con-sidered	more	appropriate,	namely	maintaining	physical	distance	from	one	another,	without	being	socially	separated.	Not	to	mention	the	information	pandemic	problem,	false	health	in-formation,	especially	Covid-19,	became	the	most	reported	by	the	Public	Information	Office,	Communication,	Informatics	and	Statistics	Office	of	DKI	Jakarta	Province	in	August	2020.	As	reported	by	liputan6.com	(02/09/2020),	17	health	hoaxes	went	viral	and	circulated	on	social	media	in	August	2020.	There	are	at	least	5	hoaxes	that	are	in	the	spotlight	in	DKI	Jakarta	in	August.	There	was	even	information	circulating	that	DKI	Jakarta	is	a	black	zone	for	Covid-19,	so	the	Deputy	Governor	of	DKI	Jakarta,	Ahmad	Riza	Patria	denied	this	by	stating	that	the	entire	Capital	City	area	was	not	included	in	the	black	zone	of	the	coronavirus	or	Covid-19.	Then	a	chain	message	circulated	on	the	WhatsApp	conversation	application	about	the	ap-peal	of	the	sub-district	head	in	DKI	Jakarta.	The	advisory	is	related	to	the	DKI	Jakarta	PSBB	due	to	the	Covid-19	coronavirus	pan-demic,	which	is	then	after	being	checked	on	the	official	website	of	the	DKI	Jakarta	Provin-cial	Informatics	and	Statistics	Communication	Service.	Communication	challenges	that	arise	during	the	Covid-19	pandemic	show	that	communication	has	an	important	role.	So	that	the	role	carried	out	by	the	Committee	for	Handling	Covid-19	and	National	Economic	Recovery	(KPCPEN)	is	very	crucial.	KPCPEN	carries	out	Public	Relations	activities	to	manage	communi-cation	between	organizations	and	the	public	in	a	planned	manner	to	influence	public	views	with	responsible	actions.	Influencing	public	attitudes	is	a	big	challenge	of	communication,	namely	how	a	mes-sage	can	affect	attitudes	and	encourage	behavior	change.	Behavioral	adoption	is	the	appli-cation	or	use	of	an	idea	or	idea	conveyed	through	communication	in	the	form	of	a	message.	The	idea	or	ideas	referred	to	in	this	study	are	communication	submitted	by	the	Committee	for	Handling	Covid-19	and	National	Economic	Recovery	(KCPEN)	regarding	the	adaptation	of	new	habits.	 This	 is	 the	key	 to	 the	government’s	 success	 in	dealing	with	 the	Covid-19	pandemic,	 namely	with	effective	 communication	 that	 can	encourage	people	 to	 adapt	 to	new	habits.	It	is	important	to	know	how	the	role	of	public	relations	of	the	Committee	for	Handling	Covid-19	and	National	Economic	Recovery	affects	the	adaptation	of	new	habits	of	the	people	of	Jakarta	during	the	Covid-19	pandemic.METHODOLOGYTo	examine	the	influential	role	of	the	Public	Relations	Committee	for	Handling	Covid-19	and	National	Economic	Recovery	on	the	adaptation	of	new	habits	of	the	People	of	 Jakarta	during	 the	Covid-19	pandemic,	 researchers	 conducted	a	 litera-ture	review	related	to	the	role	of	public	relations	and	the	process	of	adopting	the	behaviour.	 	 This	 is	 descriptive	 research	with	 a	 quantitative	 approach	 to	 describe	CORPORATE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATION225COMMUNICATION, SOCIO-CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVESand	explain	systematically,	 factually,	and	accurately	 the	 facts	and	 traits	of	certain	populations	or	objects	(Kriyantono,	2020).	This	study	examines	the	effectiveness	or	success	of	messages	in	communication	programs.	The	success	of	this	study	is	that	the	messages	conveyed	can	encourage	the	process	of	adapting	to	new	habits.	The	researcher	then	connects	or	searches	for	causation	between	two	or	more	concepts	(variables)	to	be	studied.	The	research	method	used	uses	the	survey	method,	where	the	survey	method	is	a	quantitative	research	method	using	a	questionnaire	as	an	instrument	in	collecting	data	(Kriyantono,	2020).	The	population	in	this	study	refers	to	the	results	of	research	that	have	been	conducted	by	the	Indonesian	Internet	Ser-vice	Providers	Association	(APJII)	in	the	APJII	Internet	Survey	Report,	2019-2020	(Q2),	showing	that	internet	users	in	Indonesia	reached	196.7	million	people.	Meanwhile,	the	number	of	internet	users	in	DKI	Jakarta	is	8.9	million	people.	Internet	users	in	this	area	became	the	population	of	the	study.	This	study	used	the	Non-Probability	Sampling	and	use	the	Purposive	Sampling	technique	because	the	population	members	who	will	be	used	as	respondents	must	be	selected	based	on	certain	criteria	made	by	the	researcher	based	on	the	research	objectives	 (Kriyantono,	2020).	These	criteria	must	support	 the	 research	objectives	and	be	based	on	scientific	reasons,	in	this	case,	to	seek	the	role	of	the	Public	Rela-tions	Committee	for	Handling	Covid-19	and	National	Economic	Recovery	that	af-fects	 the	 adaptation	of	 new	habits	 of	 the	People	of	 Jakarta	during	 the	Covid-19	pandemic.	Furthermore,	to	find	out	and	find	out	how	the	role	of	the	Public	Relations	Committee	for	Handling	Covid-19	and	National	Economic	Recovery	on	the	adapta-tion	of	new	habits	of	the	people	of	Jakarta	during	the	Covid-19	pandemic,	an	SEM	(Structural	 Equation	Modelling)	 statistical	 analysis	was	 carried	 out	 using	 the	 CFA	(Confirmatory	Factor	Analysis).RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONAs	many	as	100	people	participated	as	respondents	to	this	study,	and	the	results	of	the	statistical	analysis	with	SEM	led	to	a	more	in-depth	analysis	related	to	the	re-sults	of	the	hypothesis	obtained	based	on	the	statistical	test.	The	research	continued	by	analyzing	the	results	of	statistical	tests	on	how	the	role	of	Public	Relations	of	the	Committee	for	Handling	Covid-19	and	National	Economic	Recovery	on	the	adapta-tion	of	new	habits	of	the	People	of	Jakarta	during	the	Covid-19	pandemic.	Based	on	the	analysis	of	the	regression	weight	path	from	the	Variable	Role	of	Public	Relations	to	Adaptation	to	New	Habit	Adaptation	shows	a	value	of	2.440.	Thus,	it	can	be	concluded	that	the	Public	Relations	Role	variable	affects	the	Ad-aptation	of	New	Habits	by	2,440.	Therefore,	the	hypothesis	is	accepted	because	its	influence	is	significant.Figure 1: Research Hypothesis Model226MERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 2022SOCIETY EMPOWERMENT AMIDST THE NEW NORMALIt	can	be	seen	in	Figure	1	of	the	Research	Hypothesis	Model	that	the	data	that	has	been	collected	from	respondents	shows	the	results	of	regression,	residual	error,	and	regression	paths.	In	the	KSI	1	variable,	it	can	be	seen	that	the	regression	path	to	the	indicator	shows	results,	namely	to	X1	of	0.878;	X2	of	0.918;	X3	is	0.931;	X4	is	0.922	and	in	the	variable	ETA	1,	it	can	be	seen	that	the	regression	path	to	Y1	shows	a	result	of	0.943;	to	Y2	by	0.931;	Y3	of	0.908;	Y4	was	0.917	and	Y5	was	0.896.	The	results	obtained	from	the	model	test	in	table	1	showed	that	the	probability	value	obtained	was	0.001	with	a	degree	of	freedom	of	26	and	then	a	chi-square	of	54.777	was	obtained.	In	this	study	the	probability	value	obtained	was	0.001	less	than	0.05	therefore	the	significance	value	was	received.	In	other	words,	researchers	can	state	that	the	estimates	of	parameters	affected	by	identification	controls	are	significant	at	the	level	of	0.05.	Achieved	conformity	of	hypothesis	testing	in	the	installation	of	the	model.Table 1: Result 1Computation	of	degrees	of	freedom:	(Default	Model)Number	of	distinct	sample	moments : 45Number of distinct parameters to be estimated: 19Degrees	of	freedom	(45	-	19) : 26Minimum	was	achieved Model	FitChi-square = 54,777Degrees of freedom = 26Probability level = 0,001Source: Processed by Researchers with AMOSTable 2: Result 2Regression Weights Esti-mate S.E. C.R. P ResultThe	role	of		Public	Relations-->Adap-tation to New Habit2,440 0,215 11,350 *** AcceptedSource: Processed by Researchers with AMOSAnalysis	of	the	regression	weight	path	from	the	Public	Relations	Role	variable	to	The	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	by	2,440.	Therefore,	it	can	be	concluded	that	the	Public	Relations	Role	variable	affects	the	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	by	2,440.	Thus,	the	hypothesis	is	accepted	because	its	influence	is	significant.After	conducting	the	hypothesis	test,	the	researcher	then	conducted	a	correla-tion	test	between	dimensions,	which	aimed	to	find	out	how	each	manifest	variable	of	an	exogenous	latent	variable	was	able	to	influence	the	manifest	variable	derived	from	 the	 endogenous	 latent	 variable.	 This	 process	 helps	 researchers	 in	more	 in-depth	discussions	and	finding	conclusions	and	suggestions	in	research.CORPORATE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATION227COMMUNICATION, SOCIO-CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVESTable 3: Inter-Dimensional Correlation Test ResultsVariable EndogenAdaptation	to	New	HabitEksogen Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5The	role	of	Public	Rela-tionsX1 0,676 0,679 0,721 0,704 0,695X2 0,732 0,724 0,773 0,773 0,731X3 0,657 0,669 0,740 0,714 0,686X4 0,702 0,684 0,759 0,749 0,734Source: Processed by Researchers with AMOSThe	Effect	of	the	Role	of	Public	Relations	on	the	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	Re-fers	to	the	data	from	the	analysis	of	the	influence	of	exogenous	latent	variables	The	role	of	Public	Relations	on	the	endogenous	latent	variables	of	New	Habit	Adaptation	shows	acceptable	results.	This	is	illustrated	by	the	results	of	the	hypothesis	test	on	the	Role	of	Public	Relations	in	the	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	which	received	an	es-timated	value	of	2,440.	Therefore,	it	can	be	concluded	that	the	Public	Relations	Role	variable	affects	the	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	by	2,440.	Then,	the	influence	of	the	Role	of	Public	Relations	on	the	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	is	significant.Then	the	results	of	the	correlation	between	the	manifest	variables	can	be	seen	as	the	result	of	the	value	of	the	correlation	coefficient	of	each	dimension	in	the	Pub-lic	Relations	Role	variable	with	the	New	Habit	Adaptation	variable.	In	the	manifest	variable	X1	about	Communication	Technicians,	the	Y1	variable	about	Awareness	has	a	value	of	0.676	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Then	the	com-parison	with	the	manifest	variable	Y2	about	Interest	has	a	value	of	0.679	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Furthermore,	the	comparison	with	the	manifest	variable	Y3	about	Evaluation	has	a	value	of	0.721	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.The	manifest	variable	Y4	about	Trial	has	a	value	of	0.704	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	And	in	the	manifest	variable	Y5	about	Adoption	has	a	value	of	0.695	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Based	on	these	results,	it	can	be	seen	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	in	the	dimension	of	Commu-nication	Technicians	towards	The	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	affects	strongly	each	di-mension,	namely	Awareness,	Interest,	Evaluation,	Trial,	and	Adoption.	This	indicates	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	as	a	Communication	Technician	has	been	very	good	because	 it	has	succeeded	 in	 influencing	Awareness,	 Interest,	Evaluation,	Trial,	and	Adoption.	In	other	words,	the	role	of	Public	Relations	as	a	Communication	Techni-cian	influences	or	encourages	one	to	adapt	to	new	habits.	The	manifest	variable	X2	about	Expert	Prescriber	and	its	correlation	to	the	Y1	variable	about	Awareness	has	a	value	of	0.732	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Then	the	Y2	variable	about	Interest	has	a	value	of	0.724	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Furthermore,	the	comparison	with	the	manifest	variable	Y3	about	Evaluation	has	a	value	of	0.773	which	can	be	con-cluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	The	manifest	variable	Y4	about	Trial	has	a	value	of	0.773	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	And	in	the	manifest	variable	Y5	about	Adoption	has	a	value	of	0.731	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	228MERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 2022SOCIETY EMPOWERMENT AMIDST THE NEW NORMALstrong	correlation.	Based	on	these	results,	it	can	be	seen	that	the	role	of	Public	Rela-tions	in	the	Expert	Prescriber	dimension	towards	the	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	has	a	strong	influence	on	each	dimension,	namely	Awareness,	Interest,	Evaluation,	Trial,	and	Adoption.	This	indicates	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	as	an	Expert	Prescriber	is	very	good	because	it	has	succeeded	in	influencing	Awareness,	Interest,	Evaluation,	Trial,	and	Adoption.	In	other	words,	the	role	of	Public	Relations	as	Expert	Prescriber	influences	or	encourages	to	adapt	to	new	habits.The	manifest	variable	X3	about	communication	facilitators	and	their	correlation	to	the	Y1	variable	about	Awareness	has	a	value	of	0.657	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Then	the	Y2	variable	about	Interest	has	a	value	of	0.669	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Furthermore,	the	comparison	with	the	manifest	variable	Y3	about	Evaluation	has	a	value	of	0.740	which	can	be	concluded	 to	have	 a	 strong	 correlation.	 The	manifest	 variable	Y4	 about	 Trial	 has	a	value	of	0.714	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	And	in	the	manifest	variable	Y5	about	Adoption	has	a	value	of	0.686	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.Based	on	these	results,	 it	can	be	seen	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	 in	the	dimension	of	Communication	Facilitator	towards	The	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	has	a	strong	influence	on	each	dimension,	namely	Awareness,	Interest,	Evaluation,	Trial,	and	Adoption.	This	indicates	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	as	a	Communication	Facilitator	has	been	very	good	because	it	has	succeeded	in	influencing	Awareness,	Interest,	Evaluation,	Trial,	and	Adoption.	In	other	words,	the	role	of	Public	Relations	as	a	Communication	Facilitator	influences	or	encourages	to	adapt	to	new	habits.	In	the	manifest	variable	X4	about	the	Problem-Solving	Facilitator	and	 its	correlation	to	the	Y1	variable	about	Awareness	has	a	value	of	0.702	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Then	the	Y2	variable	about	Interest	has	a	value	of	0.684	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Furthermore,	the	comparison	with	the	manifest	variable	Y3	about	Evaluation	has	a	value	of	0.759	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.The	manifest	variable	Y4	about	Trial	has	a	value	of	0.749	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	And	in	the	manifest	variable	Y5	about	Adoption	has	a	value	of	0.734	which	can	be	concluded	to	have	a	strong	correlation.	Based	on	these	results,	it	can	be	seen	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	in	the	dimension	of	Problem-Solving	Facilitator	towards	The	Adaptation	of	New	Habits	has	a	strong	influence	on	each	dimension,	namely	Awareness,	 Interest,	 Evaluation,	Trial,	 and	Adoption.	This	indicates	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	as	a	Problem-Solving	Facilitator	has	been	very	good	because	it	has	succeeded	in	influencing	Awareness,	Interest,	Evaluation,	Trial,	and	Adoption.	In	other	words,	the	role	of	Public	Relations	as	a	Problem-Solving	Facilitator	influence	or	encourages	to	adapt	to	new	habits.	The	results	of	the	statistical	test	provide	an	overview	of	a	significant	influence	between	the	exogenous	latent	variables	of	the	Role	of	Public	Relations	and	the	en-dogenous	latent	variables	of	New	Habit	Adaptation.	This	is	reinforced	by	looking	at	the	correlation	of	each	dimension	in	the	variable.	Any	relationship	between	manifest	variables	as	a	whole	show	that	there	is	a	strong	influence.	Looking	at	these	results,	it	can	be	concluded	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	has	a	significant	effect	on	the	adaptation	of	new	habits	as	a	whole.	These	results	can	be	used	as	good	findings	to	CORPORATE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATION229COMMUNICATION, SOCIO-CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVESbe	a	reference	in	developing	communication	programs	in	the	future.	This	influence,	which	overall	shows	significant	things,	explains	how	important	the	role	of	Public	Re-lations	is	in	encouraging	the	process	of	Adapting	to	New	Habits	in	society.	The	find-ings	of	this	study	become	a	reference	for	researchers	in	providing	conclusions	in	the	study.	In	this	section,	we	see	how	the	role	of	Public	Relations	carried	out	by	KPCPEN	in	encouraging	the	Process	of	Adapting	to	New	Habits.	Based	on	data	analysis,	it	shows	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	has	a	significant	influence	on	the	Adaptation	of	New	Habits.	The	interesting	thing	is	that	in	this	con-text	the	role	of	Public	Relations	has	a	strong	influence	on	all	aspects	of	New	Habit	Adaptation.	His	roles	as	Communication	Technician,	Expert	Prescriber,	Communica-tion	Facilitator,	and	Problem-Solving	Facilitator	have	a	strong	influence	on	Aware-ness,	Interest,	Evaluation,	Trial,	and	Adoption.This	reinforces	the	notion	of	how	the	role	of	Public	Relations	becomes	key	to	dealing	with	cognitive	dissonance,	Festinger	proposes	 that	 individuals	can	 reduce	dissonance	through	several	pathways,	but	the	literature	on	dissonance	is	largely	cen-tered	on	changing	attitudes	(McGrath:	2017).	The	role	carried	out	is	a	comprehensive	step	to	overcome	the	discomfort	caused	by	uncertainty	during	the	Covid-19	pan-demic.	Part	of	advancing	the	theory	and	practice	of	PR	is	to	effectively	address	and	combat	the	demoralizing	behaviors	that	cause	emotional	work,	and	affirm	the	value	of	PR	within	academics	(Sommerfeldt	&	Kent:	2020).This	proves	that	it	is	increasingly	necessary	to	view	Public	Relations	as	a	strategic	role.	This	significant	influence	does	not	seem	easy,	because	at	first	many	miscommu-nications	increased	cognitive	dissonance	in	society	-such	as	the	explanation	of	social	distancing-	which	made	handling	Covid-19	not	so	effective.	If	communication	does	not	have	a	meaningful	impact	on	cognitive	dissonance.	Thus,	management	should	consider	this	fact	as	a	key	factor	and	pay	attention	to	their	communication	program	with	other	activities	such	as	building	trust	to	strengthen	their	communication	(Sharifi	&	Esfidani:	2013).Paying	attention	to	communication	and	building	public	trust	is	the	main	focus	of	KPCPEN	 in	encouraging	people	 to	be	able	 to	Adapt	 to	New	Habits.	 The	 com-munication	program	that	 is	carried	out	 looks	comprehensive	when	 looking	at	 the	structure	and	efforts	to	collaborate	by	conducting	Multi-stakeholder	Engagement.	Multi-stakeholder	 Engagement	 can	mean	different	 things	 under	different	 circum-stances,	 essentially	 involving	 the	 structured	 involvement	 of	 all	 relevant	 state	 and	non-state	actors	in	policy	discussions.	The	need	is	urgent	in	that	the	topic	is	complex	and	has	many	dependencies,	to	which	no	single	actor	may	have	a	thorough	answer	(Alexander	et	al.	2020).These	communication	policies	or	programs	have	proven	effective	in	providing	a	significant	influence	on	the	Adaptation	of	New	Habits,	we	know	that	KPCPEN	has	a	Policy	Committee	that	can	immediately	issue	policies	to	accelerate	the	handling	of	Covid-19.	So	that	the	role	he	performs	as	a	Communication	Technician,	Expert	Pre-scriber,	Communication	Facilitator,	and	Problem-Solving	Facilitator	has	a	significant	influence	on	changing	attitudes	 in	this	case	Adaptation	to	New	Habits	during	the	Covid-19	pandemic.230MERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 2022SOCIETY EMPOWERMENT AMIDST THE NEW NORMALCONCLUSIONRefers	to	the	results	of	a	study	that	states	that	the	role	of	Public	Relations	car-ried	out	by	the	Committee	for	Handling	Covid-19	and	National	Economic	Recovery	(KPCPEN)	on	the	process	of	adopting	new	habit	adaptation	behaviors	in	the	people	of	Jakarta	during	the	Covid-19	pandemic	has	a	significant	influence.	These	findings	need	to	be	explored	further	in	various	aspects.	This	needs	to	be	done	to	find	out	in-depth	why	KPCPEN	has	succeeded	in	encouraging	the	adoption	process	of	new	habit	adaptation behaviors. Researchers	see	the	need	to	look	at	the	cognitive	side	of	society	at	that	time,	whether	there	was	dissonance	in	its	cognitive,	and	how	society	overcomes	the	dis-sonance.	 Seeing	 how	 the	 condition	 of	 public	 communication	when	 the	 Covid-19	pandemic	entered	Indonesia	where	at	that	time	there	was	an	information	pandemic	that	resulted	in	important	information	mixed	with	misinformation.	In	this	condition,	there	can	be	discomfort	in	people’s	cognition	due	to	the	un-certainty	caused	during	the	Covid-19	pandemic	and	existing	public	communication.	A	mismatch	between	information	and	people’s	knowledge	of	Covid-19	can	lead	to	distrust	of	information	they	should	understand.	Festinger	in	(Kriyantono,	2017)	ex-plains	that	each	individual	has	two	elements	in	himself,	namely:	cognition	(belief	or	knowledge	or	perception	or	attitude)	and	behavior.This	understanding	is	very	important	for	public	relations	practitioners,	effective	communication	is	needed	to	be	able	to	persuade	people	to	adapt	to	new	habits,	and	persuasion	will	be	successful	if	the	level	of	dissonance	is	reduced.	Communication	that	is	carried	out	and	encouraged	by	collaboration	must	not	only	be	clear	but	also	consistent	in	conveying	steps	for	the	community	to	adapt.So	that	the	information	conveyed	not	only	has	benefits,	but	also	contains	the	value	of	honesty,	interest,	and	optimism.	Because	of	the	information	pandemic	con-dition,	it	will	make	it	difficult	for	public	relations	to	work	if	you	cannot	understand	the	cognitive	dissonance	that	exists	in	society	and	fight	misinformation	circulating	in	society.	This	research	can	be	a	roadmap	for	further	research	by	looking	at	the	role	of	 public	 relations	 in	 overcoming	 cognitive	 dissonance	 in	 society	 and	 countering	misinformation	circulating	Covid-19.	Strategies	and	an	active	role	in	public	relations	are	needed	in	facing	this	challenge.	With	studies	that	look	at	how	crucial	the	role	of	public	relations	is	in	practice;	we	can	provide	a	view	on	phenomena	that	may	be	able	to	occur	again	or	at	least	have	a	similar	context	of	the	problem.REFERENCESAlexander,	K.,	Faesen,	L.,	Verhagen,	P.,	&	Mirtl,	P.	(2020).	Pandemic	Mitigation	in	the	Digital	Age:	Digital	 Epidemiological	Measures	 to	Combat	 the	Coronavirus	Pandemic.	Hague	Centre	for	Strategic	Studies.Asosiasi	Penyelenggara	Jasa	Internet	Indonesia.	(2020).	Laporan	Survei	Internet	APJII	2019	–	2020	(Q2).	Diakses	pada	12	September	2020.	https://apjii.or.id/surveiKriyantono,	Rachmat.	 (2017).	Teori-teori	Public	Relations	Perspektif	Barat	&	Lokal	Aplikasi	Penelitian	dan	Praktik.	Jakarta:	KencanaKriyantono,	Rachmat.	 (2020).	Teknik	Praktis	Riset	Komunikasi	Kuantitatif	dan	Kualitatif.	 Ja-karta:	KencanaMcGrath,	A.	 (2017).	Dealing	with	dissonance:	A	 review	of	cognitive	dissonance	 reduction.	CORPORATE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATION231COMMUNICATION, SOCIO-CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVESSocial	&	Personality	Psychology	Compass.	https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12362Shahin	Sharifi,	S.	and	Rahim	Esfidani,	M.	(2014).	The	impacts	of	relationship	marketing	on	cognitive	dissonance,	satisfaction,	and	loyalty:	The	mediating	role	of	trust	and	cognitive	dissonance.	International	Journal	of	Retail	&	Distribution	Management.	Vol.	42	No.	6,	pp.	553-575.	https://doi.org/10.1108/IJRDM-05-2013-0109Sommerfeldt,	Erich	J.	and	Kent,	Michael	L.	(2020).	Public	relations	as	“dirty	work”:	Disconfir-mation,	cognitive	dissonance,	and	emotional	labor	among	public	relations	professors.	Public	Relations	Review.	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pubrev.2020.101933Vidi,	Adyaksa.	(2020,	September	2).	5	Hoaks	yang	Jadi	Sorotan	di	DKI	Jakarta	Bulan	Agus-tus,	Kabar	Palsu	Covid-19	Dominan.	Liputan6.com	https://www.liputan6.com/cek-fakta/read/4345602/5-hoaks-yang-jadi-sorotan-di-dki-jakarta-bulan-agustus-kabar-palsu-covid-19-dominan