Socio-economic practices of resilience: portuguese national report

  
     WP4 – Socio-Economic 
Practices of Resilience  
Portuguese National Report 
 
 
Authors 
Luís Capucha (coordinator) 
Alexandre Calado 
Pedro Estêvão 
 
August 2015 
 
 
 Contents 
1. Introdução ............................................................................................................................. 1 
2. Country specific literature review on socio-economic practices of coping with hardship or 
resilience ....................................................................................................................................... 2 
3. Socio-economic characteristics of participants..................................................................... 3 
4. Narratives and dynamics of hardship .................................................................................... 5 
4.1. Narratives of hardship: how households explain hardship ........................................... 5 
4.2. Impact of the 2008 crisis and related policy changes ................................................... 7 
4.3. Other dynamics of hardship .......................................................................................... 7 
4.4. Factors that are external and internal to the households in the emergence and/or 
persistence of hardship ............................................................................................................. 8 
5. Practices of coping with hardship ....................................................................................... 10 
5.1. Income generation, protection and stabilization ........................................................ 10 
5.2. Practices to manage/reduce cost of living .................................................................. 12 
5.3. The role of assets and resources ................................................................................. 14 
6. Effects and consequences of resilience .............................................................................. 17 
6.1. Degrees of hardship and different forms of resilience ............................................... 17 
6.2. How do resilience/coping strategies of households vary/differ according to their 
socio-economic characteristics? ............................................................................................. 18 
6.3. Costs and benefits of resilience .................................................................................. 18 
7. Analysis of household resilience practices and limitations of resilience analysis ............... 21 
7.1. Socio economic characteristics ....................................................................................... 21 
7.2. Labour market developments and its implications for resilience. .............................. 22 
7.3. Welfare state and its implications for resilience ......................................................... 24 
7.4. Third sector and social economy and its implications for resilience .......................... 25 
8. Conclusions ......................................................................................................................... 26 
Bibliography ................................................................................................................................ 28 
 
 
 
1 
 
1. Introdução 
 
The current report presents the results of the analysis of the interviews taken by the 
Portuguese team within the RESCuE project. The objective of this report is double. On the one 
hand, we aim at providing a description of the main resilience practices. We take here 
resilience in a broad sense as responses shocks in families lives either caused by the crisis or 
happening in their context. On the other hand, we aim to provide an analysis of the resources 
and societal processes that are called into play in these practices as well as a tentative 
assessment of their effects in families’ lifes in the short, medium and long term. 
Aside from this introduction, the report is divided into six further chapters. Chapter 2 recovers 
an overview of the scarce research on resilience in Portugal. Chapter 3 presents a brief 
presentation of the sampling methods followed by our team, the procedures we engaged to 
contact the participants and, finally, two summary table with basic socio-economic 
characterization of the participants.  
Chapter 4 will be dedicated to present the critical moments in interviewees lives that led them 
to poverty at some point, as well as the main traits of their experiences of hardship. This is 
often important to understand the origins and timeframe of resilience practices. In chapter 5, 
we turn to presenting the resilience practices we actually identified as well as the main 
resources that are mobilized in them. In turn, chapter 6 looks into the consequences of said 
practices in families’ and individual family members’ lives. Finally, chapter 7 will present a 
short discussion of how social structuring processes (such as class, gender or migrations) shape 
resilience practices and how the characteristics of the labour market and of the welfare state 
foster or hinder them. 
We opted to make some slight adjustments to the general framework proposed by the 
coordination of the work package. The need for this adjustments emerged as we were writing 
the report and pertain to situations in which we felt: (a) that a particular heading was more 
coherent with what we were developing in another chapter – in which case; (b) there was an 
overlap between what different headings aimed at doing – in which case; or (c) important 
information for understanding the workings of resilience practices did not fit into the existing 
structure. Thus, the following adjustments were made: 
 Heading 4.2 (“Impact of the 2008 crisis and related policy changes on household 
hardship”) was diluted in chapter 7. For this effect, we added a heading on chapter to 
deal with the welfare state, as access social transfers and public services turned out to 
be too crucial resources for resilience practices but also intertwined with the workings 
of the labour market. We also added a small heading on social economy and the third 
sector.  
 Heading 6.2 (“how do resilience/coping strategies of households vary/differ according 
to their socioeconomic characteristics”) will point directly to heading 7.1 (“socio-
economic characteristics”), as the content of both overlapped and the later chapter 
dealt precisely with the role of social structuring processes and major institutional 
complexes in the shaping of resilience practices. 
We are hopeful that this changes will make for a better document and thus facilitate the 
production of the international report. 
2 
 
2. Country specific literature review on socio-economic 
practices of coping with hardship or resilience 
 
The existing scientific work on human resilience in Portugal is far from abundant and has been 
mostly restricted to psychology and health sciences. These disciplines have nevertheless 
focussed on a reasonably wide range of subjects such as family resilience in the case of disease 
(Peixoto & Martins, 2012), career orientation of adults (Meireles & Xavier, 2010), military 
personnel behaviour in international peacekeeping missions (Morais, 2009) or risk behaviours 
among children and teenagers (Simões, et al., 2010). The approaches followed closely the 
medical notion of resilience as a process of coping and adaptation and are grounded on 
quantitative methods and statistical analysis. 
Social sciences, on their hand, have largely ignored the notion of resilience up to now, with 
only a handful of exceptions. Within Portuguese sociology, only the subfield of sociology of 
education, where the perspective of resilience set forward by the OECD in the context of the 
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) has been the major influence, has had 
any significant work on resilience. Resilience is here viewed as the condition of students “who 
succeed despite adversity”  (OECD, 2011). This is very much a quantitative approach: on the 
context of PISA, these students are identified through comparison between standardised PISA 
tests and indicators of their socio-economic status. Despite the “heroic” overtones of this 
approach to resilience, it should be stressed that key to the OECD is between the approach to 
characteristics of schools and school systems.  Following this line, detailed analysis of PISA 
results of Portuguese Students have begun to be undertaken by Portuguese researchers 
(Carvalho, et al., 2014).  
The only other social science where resilience is human geography, where some Portuguese 
researchers are trying to promote an agenda of research on “resilient territories” in order to 
study long-term transformations and emphasize the role locally grounded structures and 
factors that foster creativity and social innovation (Freitas & Estevens, 2012). This current, 
however, still lacks any significant empirical works. 
  
3 
 
3. Socio-economic characteristics of participants 
 
The Portuguese team adopted a mixed sampling strategy for its fieldwork. We started by 
devising a theoretically-driven sample, creating quotas for subjects based on socioeconomic 
groups  that have been identified as more vulnerable to poverty by the scientific literature in 
Portugal.  
Two subsamples, each comprising 12 cases, were devised to account for the geographical and 
socioeconomic characteristics of the two cases.  Tables 1 and 2 present both the generic main 
profile and, in most cases, further specifications to account for the maximum amount of 
diversity within the sample. A lot of the profiles are common to both subsamples. These 
include pensioners, unemployed and industrial and services workers. In the case of 
unemployed, we wanted to ensure diversity regarding educational resources. We chose to 
single out the case of the poor Portuguese Gypsy, given on the one hand, the persistent higher 
rates of poverty and lower schooling levels among this group and, on the other, the still 
persistent discrimination - in accessing the labour market - of which they are still target.  
A further category was put forward to allow some flexibility on the selection of families for 
interviews: that of “multiproblematic families”. This is a broad term applied to families which 
are simultaneously exposed to different factors of poverty – such as monoparentality, low 
qualifications or precarious insertion in the labour market. We opted also for having families 
with different situations regarding the RSI (the Portuguese Minimum Guarantee Income 
measure). Given both the importance of this measure in poverty fighting and the strong 
reduction on the RSI coverage brought by austerity measures in Portugal1, this option aimed at 
allowing the observation of contrasting effects of welfare policies in resilience processes. 
Nevertheless, measures were taken to include specific profiles that are more relevant in each 
of the local contexts. In the case of Gótica, two types of “farmer” profiles were included, a 
labourer and a small landowner. This was due the importance of agricultural activities in the 
municipality and also to – particularly in the case of the small landowner – the need to ensure 
at least one observation point on the role of land resources on resilience processes. The 
presence of public servants – or, at least, people working for public institutions even if with 
other types of contract – also needed to be safeguarded, given the importance of the public 
sector as an employer in the municipality.  In the case of Lugarão, the option of including 
immigrants was obvious, given their importance in the population and the projects’ goal of 
analysing the relation between migration and resilience processes. 
The initial construction of the sample relied heavily on the experts input. These were asked to 
fill in a document listing families of which they had knowledge and which might be interested 
in participating. This allowed for the identification of a significant portion of the sample and 
also facilitated first contact. In the case of Gótica, it was also necessary to resort to further 
contacts with civil parish presidents2 and also from participants themselves for completion of 
the samples. In the case of Lugarão, it was necessary to extend the sample because a high 
                                                          
1
 Despite the deepening of the crisis between 2010 and 2013 – with negative GDP growth rates 
registered in 2011, 2012 and 2013-  the number of beneficiaries of the RSI in Portugal fell by 31,7% in 
this period. This apparent contradiction is explained by the setting of tighter rules for accessing this 
transfer in the context of austerity policies.  
2
 Civil parishes are subdivisions of municipalities and are the smallest administrative units in Portugal. 
Each civil parish has an elected president. 
4 
 
number of participants refused to take part in the photographic interviews phase. The 
following two tables present a basic characterization of the participants from the two areas. 
Table 1 - Participants in Gótica 
# Name Sex Age Education Occupation Nationality 
1 Teresa & 
José 
F&M 48 (T), 
50 (J) 
Secondary (T), 
Basic (J) 
Assistant at nursery home (T), 
unemployed (business owner)(J) 
Portuguese 
2 Pilar & 
Armando 
F&M 36 (P), 
38 (A) 
Basic (P), 
Secondary (A) 
Assistant at nursery home (P), 
unemployed (travelling 
salesman) 
Portuguese 
(Gypsy) 
3 Fátima F 45 Basic Library clerk Portuguese 
4 Teresa F 43 Secondary Municipal clerk Portuguese 
5 Cristina F 34 Basic Masseuse Portuguese 
6 Marta F 37 Basic Factory worker Portuguese 
7 Carla F 43 Secondary Taxi driver Portuguese 
8 Noélia F 42 Basic Assistant at nursery home Portuguese 
9 Nascimento M 73 Secondary Retired (industrial draughtsman 
& business owner) 
Portuguese 
10 Luís M 49 Basic Café owner Portuguese 
11 Maria F 72 Basic Retired (cook) Portuguese 
 
Table 2 - Participants in Lugarão 
# Name Sex Age Education Occupation Nationality 
13 Malam M 66 None Unemployed (Construction worker) 
Guinean 
(Bissau) 
14 Julian M 39 Basic Unemployed (Construction worker) Romanian 
15 Eliane F 31 Basic Unemployed (Waitress) Brazilian 
16 Baluta F 24 Basic* Cleaning worker 
Guinean 
(Bissau) 
17 Cláudia F 39 Tertiary** Unemployed (estate agent & cook) Portuguese 
18 Ausenda F 36 Basic Unemployed (supermarket cashier) Cape Verdean 
19 Navnital M 65 Basic Retired (former business onwer) Indian 
20 Dimar M 25 Basic Unemployed (construction worker) 
Guinean 
(Bissau) 
21 Madalena F 55 Basic Cleaning worker Cape Verdean 
22 Marieta F 39 Basic Cook/Cleaning worker Cape Verdean 
23 Lourença F 41 Basic Restaurant owner São Tomean 
24 Pedro M 37 Basic Waste collector Angolan 
25 Aurora F 53 Basic Unemployed (hairdresser) Portuguese 
26 Geraldo M 62 Basic Unemployed (construction worker) Cape Verdean 
* Baluta was taking a vocational course at the time of the interview 
* Cláudia concluded her higher education course in between the two interviews. 
 
  
5 
 
4. Narratives and dynamics of hardship 
 
4.1. Narratives of hardship: how households explain hardship 
 
Our interviewees’ accounts of their own experiences of poverty can be said to relate to three 
major dimensions: restriction; dependence; and mental suffering. Restriction refers to activities 
that one cannot engage at present due to lack of resources. The more immediate one is the 
need to restrict one’s diet. C. referred how fresh fruit had to become secondary in order to 
guarantee the main course to the other four family members. J. mentioned stopped buying 
wine or beer.  
Another kind of restriction is no longer being able to engage in generosity gestures towards 
family members and particularly children. Pilar & Armando expressed sorrow for never being 
able to buy a sweet or a small toy for their small children when going shopping. This kind of 
restriction can also take the form cherishing exceptional moments in this regard. Teresa 
showed us photos of her adolescent son swimming with friends in a holiday trip organized by 
the school, emphasizing that it was the only time during his adolescence that she was able to 
afford it. 
Restrictions also affected spatial mobility. Thus, we had interviewees who could no longer 
afford to leave the town or the village where they live on vacation or even for small leisure 
time. Noélia mentions no longer being able to afford a week at the beach in the summer as she 
did when her and she had a better job in a furniture factory. Teresa & José, who had a more 
steep downward trajectory in income terms, stopped making weekend trips and vacations that 
they were able to make – including a motorbike tour in Brazil. 
Another effect that can be classified under the restriction heading is the retraction from 
contact with others. In our sample, retraction from contact took three different forms. The 
first form is retract from involvement in associations and civic life. Malam, an immigrant from 
Guinea-Bissau, claims that he has stopped going to events of an association of immigrants 
from his region that is located in Lisbon, for no longer being able to afford public 
transportation. The second is restriction from contacts with friends. Nascimento, who moved 
back to his native village after retiring, stopped going back to Lisbon to see friends because of 
the costs of the trip.  But retraction can also be felt towards one’s own family. J. stopped 
having family celebrations for Christmas and Easter – partially because his relatives emigrated 
elsewhere in Europe and partly because they felt they could no longer afford a proper 
reception.  
The sense of dependence from the family is another dimension of interviewees accounts of 
their situation. This is the case of younger interviewees, who live with their family and are 
unable to settle on his own because of lack of a job and regular income.  
The reverse feeling of seeing oneself as the main responsible for providing care and income for 
one’s family - is also present. This is very much the case of women who are tasked with caring 
for elder family members. Cláudia is the sole carer for her mother, who lives alone and has 
been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s, something that she feels at the same time as her moral 
obligation and retribution for her mother’s affection - but also as something that puts a further 
strain in C.’s physically debilitated condition. Likewise, Noélia prioritizes the need to taking 
6 
 
care of her mother, who suffered a stroke, even if that means eschewing job opportunities 
away from the village.  
Another related experience is the strain of being at the supporting end of family solidarity 
networks. Thus, Malam reported that her family in Guinea-Bissau expect him to provide for 
needed goods – particularly medicines – something that forces him to recur to gift networks 
and thus further indebting him with friends. In turn, Nascimento, had to shelter her young 
adult grandchildren after his older son’s divorce and decision to emigrate to Brazil as well as 
financially supporting him and also his younger son that had   - something that, coupled with 
pension cuts, has put a strong drain on his savings and severely disrupted his ability to lead a 
comfortable life after retirement. 
Finally, mental suffering refers to experiences of stress and fear and depression. Ausenda 
claimed that she often has trouble sleeping at night just thinking how she will put food on the 
table in the following day. Cláudia recalled how often she felt unable to get out of bed on the 
immediate months following her and her husband’s dismissal, being inclusively medicated for 
depression.   
We also probed for the interviewees’ aspirations and how they envisioned their own future 
and that of their families. Five main themes emerged from the interviews in this regard.  
The first theme was having a career or at least some form of job stability. This theme was 
present in the interviews where the subject had precarious job or no job at all. It assumed two 
major variations. The first variation is the getting job as a strong wish but without immediately 
foreseen how to get one. When asked what she would be more important for her in the near 
future, Ausenda told us that if she, her husband and her son could get a job in the nearby 
future, it would be good enough for her. In the same vein, Julian expressed his conviction that 
he was bounded to that find a job, as “things could not continue to be bad for ever”. The 
second variation was that of unemployment as a temporary setback. On the first interview, 
Cláudia affirmed vehemently her belief that she would find work as soon as she finished the 
higher education course she was taking – stating that two of her teachers had already hinted 
at offering her a job in that situation.  
The second theme is owning a house. This is characteristic of the interviewees who live in 
either rented flats or in social (council) housing. Eliane, a Brazilian immigrant who lives on a 
shared flat, told us that her greatest dream would be having her own house - either in Portugal 
or in Brazil – where she could bring in her children and her mother to live with her. Likewise, 
Teresa, who is a tenant, described her greatest dream as being to own a house. She had even 
identified a potential target that and that was being put up for sale by a bank, and calculated 
that her mortgage payments would be similar to the amount she was currently paying as a 
rent.  However had her application for credit turned down because she could not present the 
guarantor required by the bank.  
The third theme is emigration. Teresa &José, who are locked into long family dispute regarding 
what he claims to be his rightful share of the family’s small business, would provide him with 
capital for emigrating to Southern Brazil and opening a restaurant. Luís, a former emigrant for 
30 years in Belgium who invested all his savings in a small café in his native village, showed 
himself as disillusioned with his option of returning and repeatedly claimed that his only 
chance was once again moving abroad. Baluta, a young woman from Guinea-Bissau, is 
contemplating immigration to England upon finishing the vocational course – although she had 
yet to make concrete plans. And between the first and second interviews, Cláudia’s husband 
7 
 
decided to emigrate to England, following an invitation by a cousin who was working in a meat 
processing plant and assured he could get a job there for him. Cláudia was now enthusiastic 
with the prospect of following her husband and confident she would find a job also. She also 
cherished the prospect of her young son becoming proficient in both Portuguese and English, 
and also of providing her younger daughter with the chance to study in a British University. 
A fourth theme that emerged from the interviews was that of returning home. This is came 
from one of the interviews to immigrants, although it took the form of an outburst of 
frustration rather than as a concrete option that was being seriously weighed. Malam, an elder 
immigrant also from Guinea-Bissau saw it as the only way, stating “if things didn’t improve 
soon, it would be better to return to his country. Nevertheless, we were surprised the second 
interview had to be anticipated because, on the follow-up contact, he told us that was actually 
going back to Guinea-Bissau to take care of his wife that had fallen ill. 
One final theme emerged from the interviews: the inability itself of projecting the future due 
to the extremely precarious living conditions. Pedro is an exemplary case in this regard. He 
went through an ascending trajectory in which he moved from construction to a typography 
and in which he was even engaging in training in industrial engineering and even 
contemplating applying for a higher education course. However, he was pulled into a situation 
of long-term unemployment with the crisis. He now feels as devoting all his energies to 
strategies of short-term survival and thus feels incapable of projecting his long term future. 
 
4.2. Impact of the 2008 crisis and related policy changes 
 
This subject is developed on chapter 7. 
 
4.3. Other dynamics of hardship 
 
Regarding relation to poverty, the biographical trajectories of the interviewees in our sample 
can be classified into three groups: long-term poverty; change in poverty way of life; and fall 
into poverty. Long-term poverty is a term we applied to the cases in which the interviewee and 
his family had long lived in poverty conditions, at least preceding the crisis. This was the case in 
our sample of: Pilar & Armando; Baluta; Dimar; Madalena.; Marieta; & Geraldo.   
Fall into poverty is a term we applied to trajectories in which were pushed in to poverty by 
events either: (a) directly connected to the crisis such as job loss, degradation of working 
conditions or the closing of one’s own business or (b) personal turning points, such as an 
illness, the death of a family member or a divorce. In our sample, this was the case of Teresa 
&José; Nascimento.;Natvnital. Maria; Aurora.; Luís; Carla; Fátima; and Noélia. 
Finally, we have changes in poverty ways of life, which is but understood here as 
reconfiguration both of objective conditions and lifestyles in the aftermath of the crisis, 
leading to a different experience of poverty. In our sample, this is the case of Julian; Marta; 
Malam; Lourença; Eliane; and Ausenda. We will discuss both the pivotal points in the lives of 
the interviews and their effects on their relation to poverty in the following subchapter. 
8 
 
 
4.4. Factors that are external and internal to the households in the 
emergence and/or persistence of hardship 
 
In our analysis, we considered two distinct (though interconnected) dimensions regarding the 
emergence and persistence of hardship. The first is a classification of the pivotal moments in 
the biographical trajectories of the interviewees as they emerged from their accounts. The 
second is a preliminary attempt to discuss what we termed factors of hardship, that is, wider 
phenomena whose configurations interlink with the individuals life trajectories that 
contributed to either intensified or attenuate hardship. These factors will be discussed at 
length in chapter 7, so we shall concentrate here on the pivotal moments. 
The pivotal moments are strongly associated with risks pertaining to income generation, 
personal health and lifecycle, many of which have overlapped and been exacerbated in a 
context of economic crisis, reconfiguration of power relations in the labour world and austerity 
in social policies.   
The first of such risks is that of unemployment. The loss of one’s job, whether through personal 
dismissal/non-renewal of contract or to the closure of one’s workplace is a key moment in 
propelling interviewees into a situation of poverty. Thus Cláudia relates being “thrown into the 
doldrums almost overnight” when both she, who worked as a cook in a canteen and her 
husband, who worked as a security guard in a private security firm, lost their jobs in the same 
month in 2013. Likewise, Noélia identifies the key downturn moment in her life – both because 
of the loss of income but also of the relationships with co-workers built there - the closure of 
the furniture factory in 2010, where she had worked for 24 years. 
Also similar in impact is the closure of one’s own business. This is the case of Teresa & José, 
whose business of event organization closed in 2008 (due to increasing costs, dwindling 
demand and a conflict with a business partner) and whose subsequent ventures (a children 
theme park in the premises of their former business and later the investment in a loader 
backhoe for sanitation works and forest cleaning) all failed, leaving both unemployed since 
2012. 
Also relevant in this context are health risks, and particular work accidents and occupational 
diseases. Cláudia suffered a work accident three days before the end of her fixed-term 
contract and as she was moving to work another firm with a better contract. Amid increasing 
pain, she was diagnosed two days later with a disc herniation which forced her have surgery 
and a long recovery. This left her on a lull: she was not able to claim insurance – as the firm did 
not recognize the accident to take place during the contract – or sick leave from Social Security 
– as by law, work accidents are to be covered by the mandatory insurance payed by the firms. 
Due to her illness, she also lost the contract she was starting, leaving her unemployed since. 
The case of Ausenda is also characteristic of these risks. She contracted a tendinitis while 
working as a supermarket cashier also leading to a later dismissal at the end of the fixed term 
contract. This left her unable to get a full-time job since then. 
Another pivotal moment - and one whose consequences are strongly gender-biased – is 
divorce or separation. Aside from the psychological strain, separations make up for a 
significant drop in income which is aggravated in the cases when one part – usually the woman 
9 
 
– is awarded the custody of children and the other part either refuses or is unable to pay child 
support. This was the case of Fátima, who left her second husband in 2007, taking her two 
children with her. This meant renting a new flat and supporting expenses exclusively on her 
own, as her ex-husband emigrated to France and never paid any child support. The separation 
of Teresa had a similar effect. She left her second husband in 2008, taking her son with her. As 
she was earning minimum wage, she opted to move into her mother’s house in another town 
– which but also implied a 50-km ride by car everyday to work and back.  
Ageing is another relevant risk. Thus, Nascimento envisioned moving with his wife from Lisbon 
to his native village in the early 2000s as a way to mitigate the drop in income upon 
retirement. However, he is now in a position where he has little margin - apart from drawing 
on the savings on which he had counted - to deal with the unforeseen need of having to 
provide financial support for both his sons as well as housing his grandchildren.  
Finally, there is the case of immigrants, whose pivotal moment is the arrival in Portugal itself at 
a time of crisis. In this was the case of Malam. Malam had first emigrated to Portugal back in 
the early 1990s and then returned to Guinea-Bissau in 2007. Based on his pre-crisis 
experience, he decided to return to Portugal in 2010, only to find himself unable to in a 
construction sector that had been. It was also the case of Baluta, whose family arrival in 
Portugal coincided with the beginning of the crisis, which meant that her parents had 
difficulties in finding jobs – with her mother going as far as engaging in seasonal working in 
farms in Spain - and resulted his father later returning to Guinea. 
 
  
10 
 
5. Practices of coping with hardship 
 
5.1. Income generation, protection and stabilization 
Coping practices that act on income generated and/or available aim to establish ways to 
protect and stabilize household income in order to preserve the lifestyle and consumption 
patterns. These are activated by implementing new forms of generating income or replacing 
lost income with family, community or public support mechanisms, whether formal or 
informal, for short or long term. 
Paid work represents the main source of income for families. In most cases, is full time and 
with a fixed-term contract. We found only two cases where it was mentioned permanent 
contracts - Teresa and Fatima - and also only a few cases of work without a contract, 
associated with low-skilled odd jobs. Examples of this are the cases of Malam, who 
occasionally works informally in construction in small tasks, and Eliane, that while she was 
unemployed worked as a cleaner, also on an informal basis. There are not many situations of 
multiple jobs from one household member. Instead we found many situations in which various 
members of the household contribute to the overall income. The existence of unpaid labor is 
also residual, usually taking the form of volunteering for future remuneration and the 
respective formal integration in that specific job. For example, Pedro helped out in a café as a 
cook trying to make it a paid job, while Marieta’s son works as a volunteer in the fire-fighting 
department, aiming to be a professional in the future. 
Another characteristic of coping practices that stands out is the importance of paid work to 
support the household budget. Although we find in all households unemployed members, in 
most of them there is at least one member working full time, providing the revenue base for 
the household. The case of Cláudia is paradigmatic of this situation. Both she and her husband 
are unemployed, yet both daughters are integrated professionally. The younger one works full-
time, with a contract, in a clothing store; while the eldest does manicures and pedicures on an 
informal basis. Similarly, Aurora, also unemployed, is dependent on social transfers and the 
income provided by her son, who is working with a full-time contract, to make ends meet. Only 
in cases of isolated persons we find people living essentially of odd jobs and social transfers, 
such as Julian, Pedro and Geraldo. 
It is also important to highlight the tendency of general devaluation of the employment status. 
We can assist to a general trend of depreciation of the employment status from the previous 
professional career or the last employment. Cláudia went from being a real estate agent to 
being a cook, Teresa was a small business owner and now works as an attendant at a nursing 
home, while Carla went from ophthalmology technician to work on commission as a cabbie. 
Also, situations where people work on skilled jobs are residual. 
 
We identified two cases of self-employment, both with singular characteristics. Luis, a former 
Portuguese emigrant, decided to return. Having some money saved, set up his small business - 
a local café. Not emerging as a coping strategy, the business suffers from the effects of the 
crisis. Today Luis needs to support his family and the business represents a source of 
vulnerability and limitation to the activation of other strategies, such as re-emigrate. Lourença 
and her family, on the contrary, saw in the opening of a restaurant a way to create jobs and 
livelihood for the family. They were in a critical situation. The investment in the business itself 
11 
 
comes in a context where both household adult members were unemployed. Now, even 
tough, it barely makes ends meet it provides work for the adult members and meals for 
everyone in the family. However, investment conditions for opening the restaurant are quite 
singular, in that they were obtained through redundancy payments mandated by the court, in 
the context of labor disputes with former employers. 
Social transfers play a decisive role as safety nets (in some cases the only) in the case of loss of 
all or significant sources of income. Almost all families interviewed are framed by some kind of 
support income provided by the Welfare State. The most common types are: minimum 
guaranteed income, children allowances, unemployment benefit, pensions and social housing. 
Given the changes in eligibility conditions for social support, to be awarded these allowances 
means that the households in question have strong vulnerabilities. Pensions have a particular 
role, since in some cases they represent the key contribution of the Welfare State as an 
income source, being the basis for family’s redistribution networks. 
We also found more active strategies. Maria and her husband, both elder, take care of Maria’s 
mother (aged 90), thus joining her pension to the family’s budget, allowing them to strengthen 
the sources of income. Teresa and Fátima are interesting cases of support mechanisms 
provided by Welfare State in extreme situations. In both cases the ex-husbands do not pay 
alimony intended for their children, forcing both women to turn to the social security 
replacement allowance for child maintenance. 
 
Informal economy is also an important coping strategy, which can be distinguished between 
the support provided by family networks and friends and the support of local institutional 
network. Support of family and friends is reflected primarily through the distribution of goods 
or through the assumption of certain roles in family organization. In Carla’s case, her parents 
began to assume a more prominent role in the education of their granddaughter, taking on 
school costs and other immediate needs, as well as taking care of her during the day. This help 
allows Carla to hold broader work schedules, which she needs being a cabby working on 
commission. Carla also dines daily with parents and receives from them grocery shopping. 
Despite being employed full-time, this support is critical to meet their immediate needs. 
Cláudia also receives support from her mother and in-laws to pay the playground of her son, 
and also receives vegetables and fruit weekly from the in-laws’ garden, as a form to cut down 
costs on food budget. 
Similarly, the institutional network mainly takes the form of food support. We found multiple 
cases of families being helped by food banks. It’s not a situation limited only to cases of 
absolute poverty. In the majority of cases, access to the food bank runs via guaranteed 
minimum income. Benefiting on the knowledge that social assistants gain the reality of 
families, they signal and approach families in order to be awarded such help. There are also 
situations such as Marta’s, which food support began as a request from school for her children 
to eat lunch during holydays at school, but in the meantime has become a systematic weekly 
help directed to the household. 
We also found some cases of money handouts. However they occur mainly among the 
immigrant communities and has a residual weight in the overall strategies. Pedro and Baluta 
refer to participate in an informal network of gifts of small amounts of money, which are 
distributed in emergency situations by those who have some disposable income. People who 
12 
 
give and receive change over time, according to their status of income and their immediate 
needs, involving at some point everyone in the community. 
Investment in skills development also has little expression in the strategies identified on the 
analysis. Actually, only Cláudia refers betting on higher education as a coping strategy; with 
expectations after graduation to solve her unemployment situation. The ability to implement 
this strategy is closely associated with having received a scholarship to support her financially, 
and the fact that both her daughter provide help to fulfill the family’s budget. Pedro also has 
invested years ago in vocational training, at the secondary level, as an industrial technician 
while being unemployed. Despite having enjoyed the training, which he concluded 
successfully, and the will he manifests to invest in higher education on industrial engineering, 
the stagnation of the labor market and the urgent need for income made him suspend 
indefinitely his project. 
 
 
5.2. Practices to manage/reduce cost of living 
Coping practices focused on lifestyles and consumption patterns aim to act on living conditions 
of the household, by the development strategies for reducing consumption and the cost of 
living. In a framework of a general reduction in household incomes and rising cost of living, as 
well as the strengthening of employment opportunities (formal and informal), households by 
changing their lifestyles promote strategies that allow them to meet their immediate needs. 
Changes in consumption patterns play a dominant role in this type of coping strategies, 
covering virtually all aggregates interviewed. Indeed, cases where consumption patterns have 
not suffered major changes are those household aggregates already with consumption 
patterns quite meager, as the cases of Pilar and Armando, Baluta and Navnital. 
To promote such strategies, families have made changes in terms of nutrition. On the one 
hand, due to the weight that food consumption represents in the family budget; on the other 
hand, because it is an area that allows changing both the quantity and the quality of 
consumption. Cases like Marieta’s and Madalena’s reach point to the scarcity of resources held 
by those households, limited to cuts at the grocery store to produce any significant cuts in 
their household budget. Similarly, Lourença’s family diet is determined by left over from the 
restaurant, where they eat their main meals. 
This trend is backed by the development of a strategic approach to the grocery supply. We 
have identified various households, as the cases of Aurora or Marta, referring the careful study 
of advertising leafleats, concentrating shopping around promotion events or discount days, 
and shifting to low cost or white brand products. This strategic approach is often followed by 
reducing consumption. Malam refers to have reduced consumption of food, Nascimento has 
little food produced outside the household, while Noélia reduced the amount of food 
purchased at local grocery stores, starting to buy all the groceries at the supermarket. Even the 
timing for grocery supply is a matter of strategic action. Teresa restricted herself to only going 
to the grocery store once a week, carefully listing the products that she needs. Pedro, in turn, 
planned his supermarket around the day he received is monthly wager from work. The first 
priority is paying the house; the second is to buy meat and main needs for the month.. After 
these, Pedro made the other payments, mostly bills, and used the rest of it to a second trip to 
the supermarket (during the whole month) to buy the other complementary goods. 
13 
 
With respect to the remaining consumption forms, the margin of action of households is 
reduced. Cláudia and Teresa refer cuts in communications and internet access; Marta, 
Nascimento  and Navnital refer cuts on eating out and other leisure activities; Teresa and José, 
Noélia and Navnital report having failed to do any type of vacation. Nascimento says that he’s 
no longer able to come from Gótica to Lisbon to meet friends for failing to meet the costs of 
the trip. In turn, Teresa changed her weekly schedule so as to go to bed early during winter in 
order to save money on the use of heaters. Marieta and Cristina consider clothing as a non-
essential product, in order to cut expenses. 
Household production/work for own consumption has little expression in the selected cases. In 
the cases identified, where we found home production, it plays a key role in the patterns of 
consumption, particularly in what relates to food consumption. In Gótica, Mary and 
Nascimento use the land around their property to grow vegetables and fruit, while the latter 
case also has chickens and rabbits. Geraldo’s case also stands out, since occurs in an urban 
context. Following a similar strategy, takes advantage of the surrounding land to his shed, to 
cultivate a wide variety of vegetables and fruit. The difference is that while in the former cases 
the land is private property of each household, in the case of Geraldo he uses public land to 
cultivate. Despite the high investment in home production by each household, in no case 
allows turn this practice into a form of revenue, by selling goods to the public or a cooperative. 
Geraldo also has the most creative practice of free use of public goods. Geraldo takes 
advantage of vacant public land around his shed, sharing this practice with its neighbors. It’s a 
very commonplace practice all over Lugarão and the wide Metropolitan Area of Lisbon. While 
the council does not assign other use to the land, he continues to use to grow vegetable 
gardens, sharing with his neighbors tools and cultivated goods. 
Other practices identified of free access to resources and assets are more conventional. A good 
portion of households uses food banks or other forms of food aid, provided by third sector’s 
local institution. It has a significant weight in Lugarão, which is indicative of the levels of 
poverty, but also of the presence and intervention of the institutional network. Public 
resources are also mentioned, mainly job centers and health centers. Geraldo, Pedro, Dimar 
and Cristina participated in training programs promoted by job centres for the professional 
reintegration. With the exception of Cristina’s case, in any other case these formations 
contributed to finding a job, functioning only as a way of obtaining income. Dimar refers to 
these training programs as entertain to unemployed, since there’s no expectation to anyone 
involved that they will contribute remotely to getting a job. Geraldo, with physical limitations 
from his long carrer in construction, did a gardening training. He would like to be called for a 
job as a gardener, but he’s aware that the age and the health problems (he can’t really bend 
down) do not anticipate great potential for this to come to pass.  
Health centers are also widely mentioned by respondents, constituting a particularly 
interesting finding of the fieldwork. We found several cases of people with psychological 
and/or psychiatric counseling due to depressions – as are the cases of Marta, Madalena, 
Cláudia, Aurora and Teresa. These situations tend to manifest more in women. They are 
associated with consumption deprivation – they are the ones that eat last and less, that 
postpone health consultation, to portion the medicines – and the burden of managing family’s 
budget, trying to find ways to make the money last, causing extreme stress. We also identified 
situations of continued medical care due to accident or physical stress related to work, in most 
cases manual and unqualified, as in the cases of Geraldo, Lourença, Cláudia and Ausenda. The 
use of health centers also reveals the way the public health system has the ability to reach and 
14 
 
monitor of the poorest and most vulnerable segments of society. Doctors and nurses have a 
more comprehensive approach than the specific treatments, but also signaling problems and 
providing psychological counseling. 
 
Practices relating to shared resources are activated in very specific situations. The most 
common form is house sharing. Eliane, Malam, Dimar and Pedro share housing with others. 
Only Dimar is sharing with a family member, his cousin. In the other cases the housemates 
were found based through informal contacts made in the neighborhood or through fellow 
immigrants. Ausenda is part of a network to exchange baby clothes and toys, while Geraldo 
shares gardening supplies and construction tools with its neighbors. None of these two last 
practices represents much weight in each household’s income level. 
Lastly, the reorganization of the household unit is a practice with some expression and 
significant weight. We distinguish two types of situations: (1) marriage or living together and 
(2) the reorganization of family roles. 
Marta and Carlos decided to live together and form family following an unexpected pregnancy. 
Marta lived in the city of Lugarão with her daughter, having a casual relationship with Carlos. 
Pregnancy changed circumstances and, unable to sustain one more child, she moved back to 
her home village, to live with Carlos, his two daughters and his grandmother, in the latter’s 
house. Lourença, in turn, decided to marry her partner. Fernanda already shared her house 
with Lourença and her five children for a while. They couldn’t afford a house of their own. 
When they decided to open the restaurant together they decided to move towards marriage, 
giving them more gains in taxes and allowing them to share and transfer property. 
In Carla’s case, who lives with her young daughter, the worsening of living conditions dictated 
a drastic change in lifestyle. After returning to Lugarão, after living several years in northern 
Portugal with her former companion and father of her children, she found many difficulties to 
find a steady job. So she decided to take a cabbie’s license, since she already drove taxis before 
as an odd job to help the former companion. Being paid on commission per trip, she has to 
work the maximum amount of hours allowable. This amount of working hours was supported 
by her parents, that also live in Lugarão, that started to have a much more presence in their 
granddaughter’s life, being responsible for taking her to and from school, giving her meals and 
taking care of her. Carla also started to to have dinner with her parents on a daily basis, when 
she goes to pick her daughter. To the financial support provided by her parents there is also a 
reconfiguration of the roles of the various family members, significantly changing their 
lifestyles. 
 
 
5.3. The role of assets and resources 
The analysis of coping practices in terms of resources generated and/or activated by 
households highlight two tendencies among the selected cases. On the one hand, the majority 
of households do not have significant resources and assets that can be used in their resilience 
strategies (either directly or indirectly); on the other hand, families who still have some 
significant resources and assets are exhausting them to meet immediate needs. 
15 
 
We are able to distinguish four types of resources used in the coping strategies of households: 
(1) property; (2) access and mobility resources; (3) support networks and (4) the body and 
skills. 
he lack of assets and property is one of the most salient findings from the interview analysis. 
The majority of families do not own any significant asset, which is particularly pronounced in 
Lugarão. In the cases where the families own assets, it’s usually housing and a car. Only 
Nascimento and Teresa and José own some small portions of land. Both these households 
were pulled into poverty by the crisis and its effects. On the contrary, immigrants – both 
newcomers and established – do not hold much assets. 
This reality finds correspondence with household’s strategies. With the exception of 
Nascimento, there are no any cases identified of rental practices. In terms of sales of resources 
and assets, the cases identified point to the sale of everyday and not replaced goods - the car 
or home furniture. In only one case jewelry was mentioned. We are not facing scenarios where 
people are selling goods that in excess or that they don’t need, we are facing situations where 
families are selling what they still have left with market value. 
With regard to access and mobility resources there is the tendency of most families, despite 
the extreme difficulties, to emphasize the need to ensure mobility and access to information 
through mobile communications and the Internet. Marieta even says that after the child's 
needs, buying the public transportation pass is her highest priority, while Pedro referred that 
the increases in public transport fees greatly limits his mobility. This investment takes, 
however, a strategic and necessary character. 
Employment application opportunities in Portugal are mostly disseminated through mobile 
and social networks. Likewise, in many cases, application platforms only exist digitally. On the 
other hand, an important aspect for obtaining the majority of jobs is having a driving license 
and ability to move around. Similarly, the discount campaigns and terms of discount points in 
supermarkets essentially work via mobile phone and/or the internet - for example, in Portugal 
there is a widespread of replacing of old loyalty cards from stores to downloaded apps to 
mobile phones, even among fast food companies or general supply stores. 
Accordingly, to have no capacity to invest in communications (including mobile) and in mobility 
means to be excluded from opportunities to generate resources and capabilities to reduce the 
cost of living. The burden of investment in this type of resources falls entirely on families, not 
having any form of support or many alternatives.  
Networks and support structures are an essential resource for the survival of families. Against 
a backdrop of lack of own resources, and insufficient income earned by paid work, families are 
heavily dependent on resources that they can obtain from the support they can access. These 
formal and informal networks are not used to bring more comfort to families or to allow 
making medium and long term investments or plans, but are used to satisfy immediate 
expenses and needs. 
Social transfers, albeit in smaller amount and with less favorable eligibility conditions, continue 
to pose the most significant and stable form of family’s support. Also noteworthy is the role of 
community institutions, as they play an important role in signaling cases of social emergency, 
in referring families to existing social services and, particularly, in providing food and clothing 
aid. It also stands out the informal networks of gifts in money between migrants. Not being 
16 
 
particularly significant in terms of income generation, it contributes to the community's social 
cohesion and offers help when others solutions are already exhausted.  
At the family level, family networks are heavily used, particularly in families of Portuguese 
nationality. Like we can see in the cases of Carla or Luis, the way these resources are used is 
contingent on the immediate need of family members and has more effectiveness in 
households where someone in the extended family has the ability to help the remaining 
elements of the family. 
The last type of resources refers to the body and the skills and capabilities of individuals. This 
feature refers to two types of strategies. On the one hand, in terms of income protection 
strategies, individuals reveal explore all the skills or abilities they have to work. Pedro taking 
advantage of being a good cook accepted temporarily working for free in a café, trying to get 
employed there; Mary and her husband started to work on the backyard land as a hobby, and 
nowadays use it to produce vegetable gardens and raise a few animals. On the other hand, the 
body carries the weight caused by deprivation resulting from the resilience practices. Reducing 
consumption patterns, in most cases, it is at the expense of health and physical well-being of 
household members, particularly among women. 
 
17 
 
6. Effects and consequences of resilience 
 
6.1. Degrees of hardship and different forms of resilience 
The analysis of data collected during the fieldwork distinguished a set of narratives of 
hardship, allowing developing a typological organization of the relationship of households with 
poverty. The objective was trying to understand how the economic and financial crisis, and the 
austerity packages that followed, affected the trajectories of households regarding their 
socioeconomic status. Thus, the data suggests three types of trajectory: (1) long term poverty; 
(2) change in poverty ways of life; and (3) fall into poverty (new poor). 
Among the families living in a situation of long term poverty we included the cases of 
Madalena, Marieta, Dimar, Baluta, Ausenda, Geraldo and Pilar and Armando. In the second 
typo, of chaning in poverty ways of life, we included the cases of Julian, Marta, Malam, Pedro, 
Lourença and Eliane. Finally, in the case of families that have fallen into poverty we consider 
the cases of José and Teresa, Nascimento, Cláudia, Navnital, Maria, Aurora, Luis, Carla, Noélia, 
Teresa and Fátima. 
With regard to the results of resilience processes we also organized the interviewed 
households according to the suggested typology. Thus, we distribute families as follows: 
 Survival: Malam, Noélia, Pilar e Armando, Teresa e José, Baluta, Ausenda, Julian, 
Dimar, Geraldo, Cristina, Marieta e Madalena. 
 Coping, managing or getting by: Aurora, Lourença, Marta, Carla, Navnital, Maria, Luís, 
Teresa e Nascimento.  
 Transforming one’s life: Cláudia. 
Cross-analysis of these typologies does not indicate a consistent pattern of relationship 
between the relation to poverty and the results of resilience processes. The only trend that is 
suggested by the trajectories is that coping strategies only reinforced the previous status of 
households, not being found any significant cases in which families have come to live in a more 
comfortable situation. 
The analysis of resilience processes reflects rather the tendency of families to mobilize all their 
assets and resources available to find solutions to current situations of hardship. Its noticeable 
how families that have fallen recently into poverty, which still hold some assets, can still 
manage their situation and get by. The longer they are in this situation the more vulnerable 
and at risk they get. Families without assets mostly fell in a situation of absolute survival, with 
no means to even establish medium-term strategies. The case of Cláudia is unique. Living in a 
situation of extreme difficulty, the aggregate’s strategy consisted in Cláudia’s obtaining a high 
education degree, aiming at getting a more favorable job prospects and better conditions for 
the family. It should be remembered, however, that this family owned some assets previously 
and was recently pulled into poverty by the crisis. 
What the analysis shows is that the form resilience processes take is not so directly related to 
the degree of hardship experienced, but is more aligned with the resources that families can 
mobilize and opportunities available, particularly on employment. Only by analyzing the 
economic, cultural and social capitals of households we can identify and characterize clusters 
according to their resilience strategies. In a scenario in which households are mobilizing all 
18 
 
resources owned and accessible, the degree of hardship is more a predictor of the outcome of 
resilience processes, in that they tend to reproduce the condition of social class of families. 
 
6.2. How do resilience/coping strategies of households vary/differ 
according to their socio-economic characteristics? 
 
This subject is dealt with in chapter 7. 
 
6.3. Costs and benefits of resilience 
The analysis of the effects and consequences of resilience processes points to the existence of 
interconnected processes of transfer of costs and risk. As a general trend, households are 
changing their possibility for action in the medium and long term to cope with immediate 
needs. In the same way, they are replacing strategic action, in function of plans that they 
made, by a reactive action in order to find a solution to the following problem. Resilience 
processes, at least in the analyzed cases, proved to be strongly conditioned by external 
structural constraints. 
In terms of mental and physical health, we can identify three major trends. Firstly, reducing 
the level of consumption is a cross-practice among most of households interviewed, mostly in 
food supply, having been signaled several situations of sub and malnutrition. We also 
identified several situations of strong psychological stress related to contexts of extreme 
vulnerability, particularly among women. For these the psychological stress is associated with 
the fact that they are the main providers of income for the household and also responsible for 
managing the budget and ensuring sustainability of family. Also they sacrifice first in eating 
and medical assistance, in order to protect the children and elder. We identified several cases 
of diagnosed depression. Lastly, most households have to deal with situations of physical 
fragility, which stems from long trajectories of poverty. The fact that the majority of 
respondents (mainly in Lugarão) have a long history of unskilled manual jobs, and in many 
cases with questionable working conditions, to which should be added questionable patterns 
of nutrition, contributes largely to the high level of health risk among this population. 
In terms of work-life balance the evidence point to a tendency of extreme vulnerability in the 
working conditions. Individuals have little space to maneuver or even negotiate working 
conditions, subjecting themselves to long working hours and unstable schedules. The high 
rates of unemployment and the worsening of working conditions (increase in taxes, lower 
wagers, increase in working hours and more vulnerability to dismissal) constitute a strong 
constraint in the ability of households to balance the relation between income needs and 
family life. In the same way, the imbalance between work and life has a particular incidence 
among women, since they are both main providers of income and responsible for the 
management of the household. Most households need to use informal support networks 
(neighborhood, family) to be able to watch and take care of their children.  
The reduction on consumption patterns, especially of food supply, also affected children, both 
in terms of quality and sufficiency of nutrition. Schools play an important role in this matter, by 
signaling situations of deprivation. However, children constitute a top priority in all families’ 
strategies. Nutrition, the satisfaction of basic needs and the engagement in education are top 
19 
 
priorities to families. Education is seen as the best chance to break away from poverty 
trajectories. There are no indications ESL trends, although the high unemployment doesn't 
create a favorable environment to leave school. Although there is a tendency to protect 
children in difficulties narratives, they are involved in household coping strategies. Young 
adults as soon as they find a job and start to work, their income becomes a contribution to the 
overall family’s budget, while among younger children, they have responsibilities in household 
chores, mainly watching and caring for younger siblings. 
In terms of social relations, there’s an accentuated tendency for isolation and less participation 
in public space. Families don’t have means to move around and to participate in activities 
outside of their home. Also, coping processes consume temporally and psychologically 
individuals. We identified several situations where people reveal unavailability for any leisure 
activity, being so consumed in work and household needs, and even embarrassment for not 
being able to satisfy the smallest daily leisure consumptions, like going to the movies, eating 
out or drinking with friends. Even among the younger respondents, the trend is closing 
relations and replacing the traditional local life (at cafés, restaurants, bars, leisure associations) 
to each other's homes.  
On the opposite, relations of immediate vicinity are being reinforced through their practical 
component. The majority of families in their weekly management need occasional assistance 
from neighbors, especially in taking care of children, which is associated with the imbalance of 
work-life. This proximity also takes the form of shared home goods and occasional favors.  
Community life is in a deep depression. This refers both to the urban and rural contexts. Small 
neighborhood businesses are closing at a high rate, people are less and less involved in local 
associations and activities, even the relation with religious institutions, like the church, are 
more random. The streets have less movement, which is a function of the time consumed by 
work, but the main factor involves the consumption incapacity. This trend affects many jobs, 
since the transference of local service businesses to shopping malls does not translate in job 
opportunities to dismissed workers. Aurora had a long career as a hairdresser. But being 53 
years old, she can’t get hired in a shopping mall hairdresser. The same trend can be found in 
clothing stores, for instance.  
In terms of long term living standards, families are depleting the assets they have, whether 
financial or any kind of property held, exhausting most of their resources to be able to resist 
any shock which are encountered in the future. This tendency is in the basis an accentuated 
increase in the vulnerability of families. Families are also experiencing the devaluation of their 
professional and social status. When they return to join the labor market after periods of 
unemployment, they do it usually in less qualified jobs, with poorer working conditions. Also, 
most jobs available require few qualifications and are extremely precarious, not constituting a 
form of social enhancement. These trends are closely related to inability for most households 
to establish medium and long term plans or goals. 
The conditions for the social reproduction of the poorest segments of society are being 
strengthened, not being visible best future prospects for young adults of the families 
interviewed. Families, although valuing education, are unable to support the attendance of 
higher education of the children. For their part, young adults, as soon as they finish secondary 
education (or get stuck at school), take any job opportunit