Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output in 2013

Cornell University ILR School 
DigitalCommons@ILR 
Federal Publications Key Workplace Documents 
2-2014 
Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act on Employment and Economic Output in 2013 
Congressional Budget Office 
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/key_workplace 
Thank you for downloading an article from DigitalCommons@ILR. 
Support this valuable resource today! 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Key Workplace Documents at DigitalCommons@ILR. 
It has been accepted for inclusion in Federal Publications by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@ILR. 
For more information, please contact catherwood-dig@cornell.edu. 
If you have a disability and are having trouble accessing information on this website or need materials in an 
alternate format, contact web-accessibility@cornell.edu for assistance. 
Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on 
Employment and Economic Output in 2013 
Abstract 
[Excerpt] The effects of ARRA on output peaked in the first half of 2010 and have since diminished, CBO 
estimates. The effects of ARRA on employment are estimated to lag slightly behind the effects on output; 
CBO estimates that the employment effects began to wane at the end of 2010 and continued to do so 
through 2013. 
Although CBO has examined data on output and employment during the period since ARRA’s enactment, 
those data are not as helpful in determining ARRA’s economic effects as might be supposed because 
isolating the effects would require knowing what path the economy would have taken in the absence of 
the law. Because that path cannot be observed, the new data add only limited information about ARRA’s 
impact. 
Keywords 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, ARRA, employment, economic output 
Comments 
Suggested Citation 
Congressional Budget Office. (2014). Estimated impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act 
on employment and economic output in 2013. Washington, DC: Author. 
This article is available at DigitalCommons@ILR: https://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/key_workplace/1236 
CBO
FEBRUARY 2014
Estimated Impact of the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on 
Employment and Economic Output in 2013
In February 2009, in response to significant weakness in 
the economy, lawmakers enacted the American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act (ARRA). The legislation’s numer-
ous spending and revenue provisions can be grouped into 
several categories according to their focus:
 Providing funds to states and localities—for example, 
by raising federal matching rates under Medicaid, 
providing aid for education, and increasing financial 
support for some transportation projects;
 Supporting people in need—such as by extending and 
expanding unemployment benefits and increasing 
benefits under the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program (formerly the Food Stamp program);
 Purchasing goods and services—for instance, by fund-
ing construction and other investment activities that 
could take several years to complete; and
 Providing temporary tax relief for individuals and 
businesses—such as by raising exemption amounts for 
the alternative minimum tax, adding a new Making 
Work Pay tax credit, and creating enhanced deduc-
tions for depreciation of business equipment.
When ARRA was being considered, the Congressional 
Budget Office (CBO) and the staff of the Joint Commit-
tee on Taxation estimated that it would increase budget 
deficits by $787 billion between fiscal years 2009 and 
2019. CBO now estimates that the total impact over the 
2009–2019 period will amount to about $830 billion. By 
CBO’s estimate, close to half of that impact occurred in 
fiscal year 2010, and more than 95 percent of ARRA’s 
budgetary impact was realized by the end of December 
2013.
Various recipients of ARRA funds (most recipients of 
grants and loans, contractors, and subcontractors) are 
required to report, after the end of each calendar quarter, 
the number of jobs funded through ARRA. The law also 
requires CBO to comment on those reported numbers.1
During calendar year 2013, recipients reported, ARRA 
funded an average of about 76,000 full-time-equivalent 
(FTE) jobs.2 Those reports, however, do not provide a 
comprehensive estimate of the law’s impact on U.S. 
employment, which could be higher or lower than the 
number of FTE jobs reported, for several reasons (in 
addition to any issues concerning the quality of the 
reports’ data).3 First, some of the jobs included in the 
reports might have existed even without the stimulus 
package, with employees working on the same activities 
1. Sections 1512(c) and 1512(e) of the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act of 2009, Public Law 111-5, 123 Stat. 115, 
287–288. This report is the 15th in CBO’s series of reports. 
Public Law 112-204, enacted on December 4, 2012, changed 
CBO’s reporting requirements; the agency’s reports on ARRA are 
now prepared annually, rather than quarterly. For the previous 
report, see Congressional Budget Office, Estimated Impact of the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and 
Economic Output From October 2012 Through December 2012 
(February 2013), www.cbo.gov/publication/43945.
2. Data compiled from recipients’ reports (on jobs funded and other 
information) are shown at www.recovery.gov/arra/. Recipients 
were asked to calculate FTEs by taking the total number of hours 
worked in a quarter that were funded by ARRA and dividing the 
total by the number of hours that a full-time employee would 
have worked in that quarter.
3. For a discussion of data quality, see Government Accountability 
Office, Recovery Act: Opportunities to Improve Management and 
Strengthen Accountability Over States’ and Localities’ Uses of Funds, 
GAO-10-999 (September 2010), www.gao.gov/new.items/
d10999.pdf (4.83 MB).
2 ESTIMATED IMPACT OF THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTPUT IN 2013 FEBRUARY 2014
CBO
or other activities. Second, the reports cover employers 
that received ARRA funding directly and those employ-
ers’ immediate subcontractors (the so-called primary 
and secondary recipients of ARRA funding) but not 
lower-level subcontractors. Third, the reports do not 
attempt to measure the number of jobs that were created 
or retained indirectly as a result of recipients’ increased 
income, and the increased income of their employees, 
which could boost demand for other products and ser-
vices as they spent their paychecks. Fourth, the recipients’ 
reports cover only certain ARRA appropriations, which 
encompass about one-fifth of the total either spent by 
the government or conveyed through tax reductions in 
ARRA; the reports do not measure the effects of other 
provisions of the stimulus package, such as tax cuts and 
transfer payments (including unemployment insurance 
payments) to individual people. 
Estimating the law’s overall effects on employment 
requires a more comprehensive analysis than can be 
achieved by using the recipients’ reports. Therefore, 
looking at recorded spending to date along with estimates 
of the other effects of ARRA on spending and revenues, 
CBO has estimated the law’s impact on employment 
and economic output using evidence about the effects 
of previous similar policies and drawing on various math-
ematical models that represent the workings of the econ-
omy.4 On that basis, and as summarized in Table 1, CBO 
estimates that ARRA’s policies had the following effects in 
calendar year 2013 compared with what would have 
occurred otherwise:
 They raised real (inflation-adjusted) gross domestic 
product (GDP) by between 0.1 percent and 
0.4 percent, 
 They lowered the unemployment rate by an amount 
between a small fraction of a percentage point and 
0.3 percentage points,
 They increased the number of people employed by 
between 0.1 million and 0.5 million, and
 They increased the number of full-time-equivalent 
jobs by 0.1 million to 0.5 million. 
The effects of ARRA on output peaked in the first half of 
2010 and have since diminished, CBO estimates. The 
effects of ARRA on employment are estimated to lag 
slightly behind the effects on output; CBO estimates that 
the employment effects began to wane at the end of 2010 
and continued to do so through 2013. 
Although CBO has examined data on output and 
employment during the period since ARRA’s enactment, 
those data are not as helpful in determining ARRA’s eco-
nomic effects as might be supposed because isolating the 
effects would require knowing what path the economy 
would have taken in the absence of the law. Because that 
path cannot be observed, the new data add only limited 
information about ARRA’s impact.
Measuring ARRA’s Impact Using 
Recipients’ Reports
ARRA requires primary and secondary recipients of more 
than $25,000 from appropriations made under the law to 
report a variety of information each calendar quarter. 
That group includes most grant and loan recipients, con-
tractors, and subcontractors, but it excludes individual 
people. The information to be submitted includes the 
amount of funding received and spent; the name, 
description, and completion status of the project or activ-
ity funded; the number of jobs funded; and, for invest-
ments in infrastructure, the purpose and cost of the 
investment. Recipients who filed reports in 2013 
reported the number of jobs on the basis of the number 
of employee hours paid for with ARRA funds.5
4. For a more detailed discussion of CBO’s approach to analyzing 
short-term fiscal policy, see Felix Reichling and Charles Whalen, 
Assessing the Short-Term Effects on Output of Changes in Federal 
Fiscal Policies, Working Paper 2012-08 (Congressional Budget 
Office, May 2012), www.cbo.gov/publication/43278.
5. Specifically, recipients were instructed to calculate the number of 
FTE jobs funded through ARRA by counting the total number of 
hours worked that were funded by ARRA during the fourth quar-
ter, divided by the number of hours in a full-time schedule for a 
quarter. For details and examples, see Office of Management and 
Budget, “Recovery FAQs for Federal Contractors on Reporting” 
(accessed February 19, 2014), http://go.usa.gov/BwZY.
FEBRUARY 2014 ESTIMATED IMPACT OF THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTPUT IN 2013 3
CBO
Table 1.
Estimated Macroeconomic Impact of the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act, 2009 to 2013
Source: Congressional Budget Office.
Note: * = Between -0.05 and 0.05.
a. A year of full-time-equivalent employment years is 40 hours of employment per week for one year.
2009
Q1 * 0.1 * * * * * 0.1
Q2 0.4 1.3 -0.1 -0.3 0.1 0.5 0.2 0.7
Q3 0.6 2.4 -0.2 -0.6 0.3 1.1 0.4 1.7
Q4 0.7 3.3 -0.2 -1.0 0.5 1.9 0.7 2.7
2010
Q1 0.9 4.3 -0.3 -1.5 0.6 2.7 0.9 3.9
Q2 0.8 4.6 -0.4 -1.8 0.7 3.4 1.0 4.8
Q3 0.7 4.1 -0.4 -2.0 0.7 3.6 1.0 5.1
Q4 0.6 3.5 -0.3 -1.9 0.6 3.5 0.9 4.9
2011
Q1 0.6 3.2 -0.3 -1.8 0.6 3.3 0.8 4.6
Q2 0.4 2.5 -0.3 -1.6 0.5 2.9 0.7 4.0
Q3 0.3 2.0 -0.2 -1.3 0.4 2.4 0.5 3.3
Q4 0.2 1.5 -0.2 -1.1 0.3 2.0 0.4 2.6
2012
Q1 0.1 1.0 -0.1 -0.8 0.2 1.5 0.3 1.9
Q2 0.1 0.8 -0.1 -0.6 0.2 1.2 0.2 1.4
Q3 0.1 0.7 -0.1 -0.5 0.2 0.9 0.2 1.0
Q4 0.1 0.6 -0.1 -0.4 0.1 0.8 0.1 0.8
2013
Q1 0.1 0.5 -0.1 -0.3 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.6
Q2 0.1 0.4 * -0.3 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5
Q3 0.1 0.4 * -0.3 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.4
Q4 * 0.3 * -0.2 0.1 0.4 * 0.3
2009 0.4 1.8 -0.1 -0.5 0.2 0.9 0.3 1.3
2010 0.7 4.1 -0.4 -1.8 0.7 3.3 0.9 4.7
2011 0.4 2.3 -0.2 -1.4 0.5 2.6 0.6 3.6
2012 0.1 0.8 -0.1 -0.6 0.2 1.1 0.2 1.3
2013 0.1 0.4 * -0.3 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5
 (Millions, annualized)a
Change Attributable to ARRA
Real Gross Domestic Unemployment Rate Employment Years
Full-Time-Equivalent
 Employment Years
Low High
Product (Percent) (Percentage points) (Millions, annualized)
Calendar Year Quarters
Calendar Year Average
Low High
Estimate Estimate Estimate Estimate Estimate Estimate Estimate Estimate
Low High Low High
4 ESTIMATED IMPACT OF THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTPUT IN 2013 FEBRUARY 2014
CBO
According to those reports, about 76,000 full-time-equiv-
alent jobs were funded by ARRA on average in 2013.6 
However, the reported number of jobs funded is not a 
comprehensive measure of ARRA’s effect on overall 
employment or even of those provisions of ARRA for 
which recipients’ reports are required. The actual impact 
could, in principle, be significantly larger or smaller than 
the number of jobs reported. 
If, for example, recipients’ reports include employment 
that would have occurred without ARRA, the impact on 
employment suggested by the reports could be too great. 
Some people whose employment was attributed to ARRA 
might have worked on other activities in the absence of 
the law—for example, a business might have bid on 
other projects if its resources had not been committed to 
projects funded by ARRA. In the case of government 
employees, state or local taxes might have been raised in 
the absence of ARRA funding (or transfer payments 
might have been reduced) to pay for some of the jobs that 
were counted as funded by ARRA. 
Conversely, the reported figure could be too low because 
the reporting requirement is limited to primary and sec-
ondary recipients of funds and thus excludes lower-level 
recipients, such as subcontractors hired by a main sub-
contractor. Thus, if expenditures under ARRA led to 
increases in employment among lower-level subcontrac-
tors and vendors, those effects would be missed by 
the reports. 
Recipients’ reports also do not include indirect effects 
that could increase or decrease the impact on employ-
ment. Among those effects are potential declines in 
employment in other businesses or economic sectors as 
demand shifts toward the recipients of ARRA funding—
a phenomenon often called the “crowding out” effect of 
government policies. Conversely, spending under ARRA 
could lead to higher employment at companies that are 
not directly connected to that spending—for example, 
because of additional purchases made by people who 
would be unemployed were it not for ARRA funds. CBO 
estimates that, under current conditions, the indirect 
effects, on net, would tend to reinforce the direct effects 
for most of the range of their estimated magnitude.
Finally, the recipients’ reports reflect only about one-fifth 
of the total amount of spending increases or tax reduc-
tions that are attributable to ARRA’s provisions. The 
reports cover direct government purchases of goods and 
services, grants and loans to private entities, and some 
grants to states and localities, but they do not cover tax 
cuts or increases in transfer payments to individuals. 
The tax reductions and spending that are not covered by 
the recipients’ reports probably had substantial effects on 
purchases of goods and services and, therefore, on 
employment.
Measuring ARRA’s Impact Using 
Economic Models and Historical Data
CBO used various economic models and historical 
data to guide its estimate of the way in which output 
and employment are affected by increases in outlays and 
reductions in revenues under ARRA. CBO’s assessment is 
that different elements of ARRA (such as particular types 
of tax cuts, transfer payments, and government pur-
chases) have had different effects on economic output per 
dollar of higher spending or lower tax receipts. Multiply-
ing estimates of those per-dollar effects by the dollar 
amounts of each element of ARRA yields an estimate of 
the law’s total impact on output. To produce estimates 
of ARRA’s total impact on employment, CBO combined 
that estimate with estimates of how changes in output 
affect the unemployment rate and participation in the 
labor force.
CBO’s Modeling Approach
CBO used evidence from models and historical relation-
ships to determine estimated “multipliers” for each of 
several categories of spending and tax provisions in 
ARRA, as shown in Table 2. Each multiplier represents 
the estimated direct and indirect effects on the nation’s 
output of a dollar’s worth of a given policy. Therefore, a 
provision’s multiplier can be applied to the budgetary cost 
of that provision to estimate its overall impact on output. 
Direct effects consist of immediate (or first-round) effects 
on economic activity. Government purchases of goods 
and services directly add to the nation’s output, dollar 
for dollar. For reductions in taxes, increases in transfer 
payments, and increases in aid to state and local 
6. For the number of jobs by agency, see “Top Agencies, as Reported 
by Recipients (Jan 1–Mar 31, 2013),” http://go.usa.gov/BwZQ; 
“Top Agencies, as Reported by Recipients (Apr 1–June 30, 
2013),” http://go.usa.gov/BwZw; “Top Agencies, as Reported by 
Recipients (Jul 1–Sep 30, 2013),” http://go.usa.gov/BwBj; and 
“Top Agencies, as Reported by Recipients (Oct 1–Dec 31, 
2013),” http://go.usa.gov/BwBV (all accessed February 19, 2014).
FEBRUARY 2014 ESTIMATED IMPACT OF THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTPUT IN 2013 5
CBO
Table 2.
Estimated Output Multipliers of Major Provisions of the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act of 2009
Continued
governments, the size of the direct effect depends on the 
policy’s impact on the behavior of recipients. If someone 
receives a dollar in transfer payments and spends 80 cents 
(saving the other 20 cents), production increases over 
time to meet the additional demand generated by that 
spending, and the direct impact on output is 80 cents. 
Similarly, if a dollar in aid to a state government leads 
that government to spend 50 cents more on employees’ 
salaries (but causes no other changes in state spending or 
revenues, with the other 50 cents used to reduce borrow-
ing or build up rainy-day funds), the direct impact on 
output is 50 cents.
CBO reviewed evidence on the responses of households, 
businesses, and governments to various types of tax cuts
Type of Activity Major Provisions of ARRA
Purchases of Goods and Services 0.5 2.5 Division A, Title II: Other; Title IV: Energy Efficiency and
by the Federal Government Renewable Energy; Title IV: Innovative Technology Loan
Guarantee Program; Title IV: Other Energy Programs; Title V: 
Federal Buildings Fund; Title VIII: National Institutes of Health;
Title VIII: Other Department of Health and Human Services
Transfer Payments to State and 0.4 2.2 Division A, Title VII: Clean Water and Drinking Water State 
Local Governments for Revolving Funds; Title XI: Other Housing Assistance; Title XII: 
Infrastructure Highway Construction; Title XII: Other Transportation 
Transfer Payments to State and 0.4 1.8 Division A, Title VIII: Education for the Disadvantaged; Title 
Local Governments for Other VIII: Special Education; Title IX: State Fiscal Stabilization Fund; 
Purposes Division B, Title V: State Fiscal Relief Fund
Transfer Payments to Individuals 0.4 2.1 Division A, Title I: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program; 
Title VIII: Student Financial Assistance; Division B, Title I: 
Refundable Tax Credits; Title II: Unemployment 
Compensation; Title III: Health Insurance Assistanceb
One-Time Payments to Retirees 0.2 1.0 Division B, Title II: Economic Recovery Payments
Two-Year Tax Cuts for Lower- 0.3 1.5 Division B, Title I: Making Work Pay Credit;
and Middle-Income People American Opportunity Tax Credit
One-Year Tax Cut for Higher- 0.1 0.6 Increase in Individual AMT Exemption Amount
Income People
Extension of First-Time 0.2 0.8 Extension of First-Time Homebuyer Credit
Homebuyer Credit
Estimated Output Multipliersa
Low Estimate High Estimate
6 ESTIMATED IMPACT OF THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTPUT IN 2013 FEBRUARY 2014
CBO
Table 2. Continued
Estimated Output Multipliers of Major Provisions of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009
Source: Congressional Budget Office.
Notes: Provisions affecting outlays (including refundable tax provisions) are identified by the same names used by CBO in its cost estimate for 
the conference agreement for H.R. 1, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (February 13, 2009). Provisions affecting 
revenues—all of which are included in title I of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA)—are identified by the 
names used in the Joint Committee on Taxation’s (JCT’s) estimate (see www.house.gov/jct/x-19-09.pdf). 
The economic impact of three tax provisions with budgetary costs over $5 billion was analyzed using a different methodology, and 
their effects cannot easily be summarized by a multiplier. Those provisions were titled “Extend by Three Years the Placed-in-Service 
Date for Each Section 45 Qualified Facility” and “One-Year Extension of Special Allowance for Certain Property Acquired During 2009” 
in JCT’s estimate and “Health Information Technology” in CBO’s estimate. Some other provisions, with total budgetary costs of less 
than $7 billion, were included in the analysis but are not shown in the table.
AMT = alternative minimum tax.
a. The output multiplier is the cumulative impact of spending under the provisions on gross domestic product over several quarters. The 
ranges shown in the table assume that the Federal Reserve is holding short-term interest rates about as low as possible and would not 
tighten monetary policy in response to a fiscal stimulus.
b. This provision is a reduction in taxes, but it is treated as having the same economic impact as transfer payments to individuals.
and transfer payments to estimate the size of those 
policies’ direct effects on output.7 For example:
 A one-time cash payment is likely to have less impact 
on a household’s purchases than is a longer-lasting 
change to disposable income because the one-time 
payment has a smaller effect on total lifetime dispos-
able income. 
 Increases in disposable income are likely to boost pur-
chases more for lower-income than for higher-income 
households. That difference arises, at least in part, 
because a larger share of people in lower-income 
households cannot borrow as much money as they 
would wish in order to spend more than they do 
currently. 
 Changes to corporate taxes that primarily affect after-
tax profits on past investment generally have a smaller 
impact on output than do policies that alter the return 
from new investment. 
Government policies also can have indirect effects that 
enhance or offset the direct effects. Direct effects are 
enhanced when, for example, a government policy creates 
jobs and those who are hired use their income to 
boost consumption. Direct effects also are enhanced 
when greater demand for goods and services prompts 
companies to increase investment to bolster their future 
production.
Type of Activity Major Provisions of ARRA
Corporate Tax Provisions 0 0.4 Deferral and Ratable Inclusion of Income Arising From Business 
Primarily Affecting Cash Flow Indebtedness Discharged by the Reacquisition of a Debt 
Instrument; Clarification of Regulations Related to Limitations 
on Certain Built-In Losses Following an Ownership Change; 
Recovery Zone Bonds; Qualified School Construction Bonds 
Estimated Output Multipliersa
Low Estimate High Estimate
7. On household spending, for example, see Jonathan A. Parker 
and others, Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Pay-
ments of 2008, Working Paper 16684 (National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research, January 2011), www.nber.org/papers/w16684; 
Matthew D. Shapiro and Joel Slemrod, “Did the 2008 Tax 
Rebates Stimulate Spending?” American Economic Review, vol. 9, 
no. 2 (May 2009), pp. 374–379, www.jstor.org/stable/25592427; 
Sumit Agarwal, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “The 
Reaction of Consumer Spending and Debt to Tax Rebates: Evi-
dence From Consumer Credit Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 
vol. 115, no. 6 (December 2007), pp. 986–1019, www.jstor.org/
stable/10.1086/528721; and David S. Johnson, Jonathan A. 
Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Household Expenditure and the 
Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, vol. 96, 
no. 5 (December 2006), pp. 1589–1610, www.jstor.org/stable/
30034986.
FEBRUARY 2014 ESTIMATED IMPACT OF THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTPUT IN 2013 7
CBO
In the other direction, substantial government spending 
can cause a shift in resources (including employees) 
away from production in other businesses and sectors 
to government-funded projects. That indirect crowding-
out effect could cause growth in employment among 
recipients of ARRA funding to be offset by declines in 
employment elsewhere in the economy. Increases in inter-
est rates are one possible mechanism for such crowding 
out: Higher interest rates discourage spending on invest-
ment and on durable goods such as cars because they raise 
the cost of borrowing. However, because the Federal 
Reserve has kept short-term interest rates very low, that 
mechanism does not appear to have been an important 
factor in 2013. By another mechanism for crowding out, 
activities funded by ARRA could reduce production 
elsewhere in the economy if they used scarce materials or 
workers with specific skills, creating bottlenecks that hin-
dered other activities. That effect, too, has probably been 
much smaller since ARRA was enacted than it might have 
been otherwise because of high unemployment and a 
large amount of unused resources (as well as the diversity 
of activities funded under ARRA). 
In estimating the magnitude of indirect effects, CBO 
relied heavily on estimates from macroeconometric fore-
casting models, informed by evidence from other types 
of models, direct estimation using historical data, and 
ongoing review of relevant research.8 
The multipliers are applied to outlays when they occur 
and to changes in taxes or transfer payments when they 
affect disposable income. CBO’s estimates, therefore, 
account for the different rates of spending for various 
types of appropriations and, similarly, for the timing of 
different tax cuts or transfer payments. In some cases, 
when different elements of a single provision were esti-
mated to have different multipliers, the total cost of a 
provision was divided among more than one category. 
In those cases, the provision is shown in Table 2 in the 
category to which most of its budgetary cost applied. Pro-
visions that affect outlays (including refundable tax cred-
its) are identified by the same names used in CBO’s cost 
estimate for the conference agreement on ARRA.9 Provi-
sions that affect revenues are identified by the names used 
in the revenue estimate prepared by the staff of the Joint 
Committee on Taxation for the same legislation.10
The estimates of ARRA’s effects on output were trans-
lated into estimates of the effects on the unemployment 
rate, total employment, and FTE employment in a series 
of steps. First, the impact on the output gap—the per-
centage difference between actual and potential output—
was calculated.11 Next, the effect of the change in the out-
put gap on the unemployment rate was estimated using 
the historical relationship between those two measures.12 
Then, the effect of changes in the unemployment rate on 
the labor force was taken into account: If unemployment 
declines and the economic environment improves, dis-
couraged workers and people who have chosen to pursue 
activities such as education rather than work will tend to 
return to the labor force. Together, the estimated effect 
on the unemployment rate and the effect on the labor 
force were used to estimate the impact on the number of 
people employed. The change in FTE employment was 
then estimated using the historical relationship between 
changes in hours per employed worker and changes in the 
gap between the unemployment rate and CBO’s estimate 
of the natural rate of unemployment.13 Because higher 
spending and lower taxes can affect output and unem-
ployment for some time after they occur, the impact of 
ARRA on employment in 2013 depended partly on the 
law’s effect on spending and revenues in previous years.
A key advantage of the model-based approach used in 
this analysis is the ability to provide estimates of the total 
effects throughout the economy of the government 
8. For a detailed discussion of those sources of information, see Felix 
Reichling and Charles Whalen, Assessing the Short-Term Effects on 
Output of Changes in Federal Fiscal Policies, Working Paper 2012-
08 (Congressional Budget Office, May 2012), www.cbo.gov/pub-
lication/43278.
9. See Congressional Budget Office, cost estimate for the conference 
agreement for H.R. 1, the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of 2009 (February 13, 2009), www.cbo.gov/publication/
41762.
10. See Joint Committee on Taxation, Estimated Budget Effects of the 
Revenue Provisions Contained in the Conference Agreement for 
H.R. 1, JCX-19-09 (February 12, 2009), www.jct.gov/x-19-09.pdf 
(40 KB).
11. Potential output is the maximum sustainable output of the 
economy. 
12. Changes in the output gap affect unemployment gradually over 
several quarters. Initially, part of a rise in output shows up as 
higher productivity and hours per worker rather than as reduced 
unemployment.
13. The natural rate of unemployment is the rate that arises from all 
sources except cyclical fluctuations in economywide demand for 
goods and services.
8 ESTIMATED IMPACT OF THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTPUT IN 2013 FEBRUARY 2014
CBO
spending, transfer payments, and tax cuts resulting from 
ARRA. By focusing on the net change in employment, 
that approach captures both the jobs created and the jobs 
retained as a result of ARRA.
A key disadvantage of the model-based approach is the 
considerable uncertainty about many of the economic 
relationships that are important in the modeling. Because 
economists differ on which analytical approaches provide 
the most convincing evidence about such relationships, 
they can reach different conclusions about those relation-
ships. In addition, each study involves uncertainty about 
the extent to which the results reflect the true effects of 
a given policy or the effects of other factors. For those 
reasons, CBO provides ranges of estimates of ARRA’s 
economic effects that are intended to encompass most 
economists’ views and thereby reflect the uncertainty 
involved in such estimates.
Changes from CBO’s Previous Estimates of the 
Impact of ARRA 
CBO’s estimates of the economic effects of ARRA are 
largely identical to those the agency published in Febru-
ary 2013.14 Changes to CBO’s estimates of the economic 
effects of ARRA in 2013 reflect small revisions to its pre-
vious estimates of the timing and magnitude of changes 
to federal spending as a result of ARRA. CBO’s estimate 
of the budgetary impact of ARRA over the 2009–2019 
period is about the same as it was in February 2013. 
ARRA’s Long-Run Effects 
In contrast to its positive near-term macroeconomic 
effects, ARRA will reduce output slightly in the long run, 
CBO estimates—by between zero and 0.2 percent after 
2016. But CBO expects that the legislation will have no 
long-term effects on employment because the U.S. econ-
omy will have a high rate of use of its labor resources in 
the long run.15 
ARRA’s long-run impact on the economy will stem 
primarily from the resulting increase in government 
debt.16 To the extent that people hold their wealth in gov-
ernment securities rather than in a form that can be used 
to finance private investment, the increased debt tends to 
reduce the stock of productive private capital. In the long 
run, each dollar of additional debt crowds out about a 
third of a dollar’s worth of private domestic capital, CBO 
estimates. (The remainder of the rise in debt is offset by 
increases in private saving and inflows of foreign capital.) 
Because of uncertainty about the degree of crowding out, 
however, CBO’s range of estimates of ARRA’s long-run 
effects reflects the possibility that the extent of crowding 
out could be more or less than one-third of the added 
debt.
Over the long term, the output of the economy depends 
on the stock of productive capital, the supply of labor, 
and productivity. The less productive capital there is as 
a result of lower private investment, the smaller will be 
the nation’s output over the long run.
The effect of the crowding out of some private invest-
ment under ARRA will be offset somewhat by other fac-
tors. Some of ARRA’s provisions, including its funding 
for roads and highways, may add to the economy’s poten-
tial output in much the same way that private capital 
investment does. Others, including its funding of 
education, may raise long-term productivity by 
enhancing people’s skills. Still other provisions create 
incentives for increased private investment. According 
to CBO’s estimates, the provisions that potentially add 
to long-term output account for between one-fifth and 
one-quarter of ARRA’s budgetary cost. 
14. See Congressional Budget Office, Estimated Impact of the Ameri-
can Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic 
Output From October 2012 Through December 2012 (February 
2013), www.cbo.gov/publication/43945. 
15. The reduction in GDP is therefore estimated to be reflected in 
lower wages rather than less employment, as workers will be 
slightly less productive because the capital stock will be slightly 
smaller. See Congressional Budget Office, letter to the Honorable 
Judd Gregg concerning the estimated macroeconomic impacts of 
H.R. 1 as passed by the House and the Senate (February 11, 
2009), www.cbo.gov/publication/20474. CBO has not updated 
those estimates.
16. For a discussion of the long-run effects of other debt-financed pol-
icies for boosting output and employment, see testimony of 
Douglas W. Elmendorf, Director, Congressional Budget Office, 
before the Senate Committee on the Budget, Policies for Increasing 
Economic Growth and Employment in 2012 and 2013 
(November 15, 2011), www.cbo.gov/publication/42717.
FEBRUARY 2014 ESTIMATED IMPACT OF THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTPUT IN 2013 9
CBO
ARRA’s long-run effect on output also depends on 
whether it permanently changed people’s saving or their 
ability or willingness to work. For example, to the extent 
that ARRA reduced long-term unemployment during the 
2009–2013 period, it might improve participation in 
the labor force, employment, and productivity in later 
years. However, CBO’s estimates of the long-term effects 
of ARRA do not incorporate any effects of that sort.
Section 1512(e) of the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) requires the 
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) to comment 
on reports filed by recipients of ARRA funding that 
detail the number of jobs funded through their 
activities. This CBO report fulfills that requirement. 
Felix Reichling of CBO’s Macroeconomic Analysis 
Division wrote the report under the supervision 
of Wendy Edelberg and Benjamin Page. Jared 
Brewster, Mark Lasky, and Joshua Shakin contrib-
uted to the analysis. This report, along with previ-
ous reports on the topic, is available at the agency’s 
website (www.cbo.gov).
Douglas W. Elmendorf 
Director

