Different approaches to model economic dimension of community resilience

04 August 2020
POLITECNICO DI TORINO
Repository ISTITUZIONALE
Different approaches to model economic dimension of community resilience / Cimellaro, G.P.; Martinelli, D.; Renschler,
C.. - ELETTRONICO. - (2014). ((Intervento presentato al convegno 10th U.S. National Conference on Earthquake
Engineering: Frontiers of Earthquake Engineering, NCEE 2014; tenutosi a Anchorage; United States; nel 21 July 2014
through 25 July 2014.
Original
Different approaches to model economic dimension of community resilience
Publisher:
Published
DOI:10.4231/D30Z70X5Z
Terms of use:
openAccess
Publisher copyright
(Article begins on next page)
This article is made available under terms and conditions as specified in the  corresponding bibliographic description in
the repository
Availability:
This version is available at: 11583/2656556 since: 2016-11-19T11:44:11Z
Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
 Tenth U.S. National Conference on Earthquake Engineering 
Frontiers of Earthquake Engineering 
July 21-25, 2014 
Anchorage, Alaska 10NCEE 
 
 
DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO MODEL 
ECONOMIC DIMENSION OF COMMUNITY 
RESILIENCE 
 
G. P. Cimellaro, A. M. ASCE1, D. Martinelli, A. M. ASCE2, and C. 
Renschler3, A. M. ASCE   
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Earthquakes and extreme events in general cause direct and indirect economic effects on every 
major economic sector of a given community. These effects have grown in the last years due to 
the increasing interdependency of the infrastructures and make the community more vulnerable 
to natural and human-induced disruptive events. Therefore, there is need for metrics and models 
which are able to describe economic resilience, defined as the ability of a community affected by 
a disaster to resist at the shock and bounce back to the economy in normal operating conditions. 
Several attempts have been made in the past to achieve a better measurement and representation 
of the economic resilience and to find suitable metrics to help decision planning. The most 
popular methodologies are based on Computable General Equilibrium models (CGE) and 
Inoperability Input-Output models (IIM). In this study, we analyze these methods, showing 
advantages and limitations. Finally, a new method is proposed to evaluate economic resilience 
which is based on equilibrium growth models and compared with other approaches. 
                     
1Assistant Professor, Dept. of Structural, Building and Geotechnical Engineering, Polytechnic of Turin, C.so Duca 
degli Abruzzi 24, 10129, Turin, IT, email: gianpaolo.cimellaro@polito.it 
2Graduate Research Assistant, Dept. of Structural, Building and Geotechnical Engineering, Polytechnic of Turin, 
C.so Duca degli Abruzzi 24, 10129, Turin, IT 
3Associate Professor, Department of Geography, University at Buffalo (SUNY), Buffalo NY14261, USA  
 
Cimellaro, G. P., Martinelli, D., and Renschler, C. "Different approaches to model economic dimension of 
Community Resilience." Proceedings of the 10th US National Conference on Earthquake Engineering (10NCEE), 
Earthquake Engineering Research Institute, Anchorage, Alaska, July 21-25, 2014.   
 
Different Approaches To Model Economic Dimension Of Community 
Resilience 
 
 
G. P. Cimellaro, A. M. ASCE1, D. Martinelli, A. M. ASCE2, and C. Renschler, A. M. ASCE3   
 
 
ABSTRACT 
  Earthquakes and extreme events in general cause direct and indirect economic effects on every 
major economic sector of a given community. These effects have grown in the last years due to the 
increasing interdependency of the infrastructures and make the community more vulnerable to 
natural and human-induced disruptive events. Therefore, there is need for metrics and models 
which are able to describe economic resilience, defined as the ability of a community affected by a 
disaster to resist at the shock and bounce back to the economy in normal operating conditions. 
Several attempts have been made in the past to achieve a better measurement and representation of 
the economic resilience and to find suitable metrics to help decision planning. The most popular 
methodologies are based on Computable General Equilibrium models (CGE) and Inoperability 
Input-Output models (IIM). In this study, we analyze these methods, showing advantages and 
limitations. Finally, a new method is proposed to evaluate economic resilience which is based on 
equilibrium growth models and compared with other approaches. 
 
Introduction 
 
Resilience, according to the current literature, is defined as the ability of systems to rebound after 
severe disturbances, disasters, or other forms of extreme events. As suggested by the work of 
Renschler et al. [1] seven dimensions of the resilience problem summarized within the acronym 
PEOPLES can be identified. In his framework, the performance indices are integrated over space 
and time in a landscape setting. Among these dimensions, the economic one is certainly one of 
the most controversial. In fact the economic aspect has been often not taken in account in the 
recent studies which have focused mainly in the actual applications and quantification of the 
other dimensions [2][3][4][5]. However, the possibility to measure the economic resilience of a 
community after a disaster is increasingly being seen as a crucial step towards disaster risk 
reduction.  Recent studies focusing on the economic resilience measurement and decision 
planning after natural/manmade disasters mainly use two approaches: Inoperability Input-Output 
models (IIM) [6] and Computable General Equilibrium models (CGE) [7].  These models are 
able to describe the behavioral response to input shortages and changing market conditions by 
computing the overall changes in economic variables across sectors, and compare the changes 
with the economy in normal operating conditions.  Both models share many common features of 
the classical Leontief Input-Output Models but they differ in some properties and characteristics. 
The IIM models have been formulated by Haimes and Jiang (2001) to analyze the 
                     
1Assistant Professor, Dept. of Structural, Building and Geotechnical Engineering, Polytechnic of Turin, C.so Duca 
degli Abruzzi 24, 10129, Turin, IT, email: gianpaolo.cimellaro@polito.it 
2Graduate Research Assistant, Dept. of Structural, Building and Geotechnical Engineering, Polytechnic of Turin, 
C.so Duca degli Abruzzi 24, 10129, Turin, IT 
3Associate Professor, Department of Geography, University at Buffalo (SUNY), Buffalo NY 14261, USA  
behavior of interconnected systems and was then expanded by Santos and Haimes (2004) [8] to 
model the demand reduction due to the terrorism threat of interconnected infrastructures.  Later 
Lian and Haimes (2006) [9] have focused on the risk of terrorism through the dynamic IIM. 
More recently Pant et al. (2011) [10] have focused on the interdependent impacts at multimodal 
transportation container terminals, and offer an overview on the metrics suited to decision 
support [11].  They also developed a specific approach (2013) [12] for the evaluation of 
quantitative resilience metrics accounting for interdependencies among multiple infrastructures.  
They belong to the second group of models the work by Konovalchuk [13] which 
developed a CGE model to analyze the economic effects of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster. 
Boisvert et al. [14] depicted the macroeconomic costs of the foot-and-mouth disease in the 
United States. Rose and Liao (2005) described a CGE methodology able to consider one of the 
few advantages of I-O over CGE that is the clear distinction between direct and indirect impacts. 
However, as stated in the work of Benjamin H. Mitra-Kahn [15] the CGE models can be a very 
useful policy tool, only for understanding static fixed output models, because they are not built 
for dynamic analyses. Resilience is a static but also a dynamic process, as affirmed, for example, 
by Rutter [16] in the Social field, by Stokols[17] in the Ecological field and by Rose[19] in the 
Economic field.  Based on the considerations above, a new methodology for measuring 
economic resilience based on the Structural Dynamic Growth model described by Li [18] is 
presented and adapted to evaluate the economic resilience index, using the procedure described 
by Cimellaro et al. [20][21] where the restoration curves are the activity/output curves provided 
by the model.   
The paper describes and compares the three approaches to evaluate economic resilience 
showing the advantages and limitations within the resilience framework.   
 
The Common Origin of IIM and CGE models 
 
Wassily Leontief [22] developed in 1966 the Input-Output model, a quantitative 
economic model that was capable of describing the interdependencies between systems of a 
national economy or different regional economies. However, extended approaches have been 
formulated, starting from I-O Model, in order to address the estimation and planning of 
economic resilience. The most popular are IIM and CGE. While the first one is more suitable for 
decision planning, the other is advantageous in the evaluation of economic resilience. 
 
The Inoperability Input-Output Model (IIM) 
 
The assumptions on which the IIM is based are the same of the classical I-O model. 
Therefore, it is an equilibrium, time-invariant, deterministic and linear representation subjected 
to all limitations of classical Leontief’s formulation. The IIM formulation derive from the 
metrics of Inoperability q given in Eq. (2), a vector where each component represents the ratio of 
production loss with respect to the usual production level of the industry and that well applies to 
represent resilience metrics, and demand perturbation d* given in Eq. (3), a vector expressed in 
terms of normalized degraded final demand. Using the symbolism of PEOPLES we can defined 
the metrics as follows: 
 
ࢗ ൌ ൣࢊ࢏ࢇࢍ൫ࡽ෡൯൧ି૚ሺࡽ෡ െ ࡽ෩ሻ                                                                                               (2) 
ࢊ∗ ൌ ൣࢊ࢏ࢇࢍ൫ࡽ෡൯൧ି૚ሺࢊ෡ െ ࢊ෩ሻ                                                                                              (3) 
 
where ࡽ෡  and ࢊ෡ are the equilibrium functionality and demand levels respectively while ࡽ෩  
and ࢊ෩  are the respective disrupted equilibrium levels. Combining ࢗ and ࢊ∗ Santos and Haimes 
obtained the IIM formulation in Eq. (4), that maintains a form similar to the Leontief I-O model, 
and that shows how Inoperability is driven by perturbations in demand. 
 
ࢗ ൌ ࡭∗ࢗ ൅ ࢊ∗ → ࢗ ൌ ሾࡵ െ ࡭∗ሿି૚	ࢊ∗                                                                                (4) 
 
 where ࡭∗represents the normalized interdependency matrix that indicates the degree of 
coupling of the industry sectors. However, since resilience needs a dynamic formulation, a 
dynamic extension of the IIM (DIIM) developed by Lian and Haimes (2006) is considered. It is a 
first-order differential equation that incorporates a rate constant into the static IIM structure, and 
whose analytical equation is given in Eq. (5). 
 
ࢗሺ࢚ሻ ൌ ࢋିࡷሺࡵି࡭∗ሻ࢚ࢗሺ૙ሻ ൅ ׬ ࢋିࡷሺࡵି࡭∗ሻሺ࢚ିࢠሻࡷࢊ∗ሺࢠሻࢊࢠ࢚૙                                                      (5)  
where ࡷ is the rate term, a matrix with elements that represent the speed at which sectors 
attain particular responses to disruptions in outputs or change in demands. 
Pant et al. (2013) made distinction between metrics able to describe static or dynamic 
economic resilience. However, in their definition the static resilience value corresponds to the 
avoided initial loss of functionality as shown in Fig. 1. The static resilience index although very 
useful it is not able to consider the recovery phase in its formulation therefore the focus has 
shifted toward the dynamic definition of economic resilience.   
 
  
Figure 1.  Comparison between static and dynamic resilience 
 
The dynamic dimension of economic resilience can be evaluated using DIIM models. A 
decision space can be generated by varying the values of three resilience metrics that represent 
the matrix ࡷ and reflect investment options. These metrics are given in Eq. (6), Eq. (7), and Eq. 
(8) and are respectively: (i) the time averaged level of operability ܯ௜ which represents the overall level of functionality maintained by a system, (ii) the maximum loss of sector functionality ݍ௜௠, and (iii) the recovery time ߬௜ which represents the time that the system implies to return to pre-disruption levels of functionality. 
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fun
cti
on
alit
y Q
Time [t]
Dynamic Resilience
Functionality
Static Resilience
Maximum initial
loss of functionality
Actual initial loss of
functionality
ܯ௜ ൌ 1 െ ଵ் ׬ ݍ௜ሺݐሻ݀ݐ
்
଴ ↔ ࡹ ൌ 1 െ ଵ் ׬ ࢗሺݐሻ݀ݐ
்
଴                                                               (6) 
ݍ௜௠ ൌ max௧ஹ଴ ሾݍ௜ሺݐሻሿ ↔ ࢗ௠ ൌ max௧ஹ଴ ሾࢗሺݐሻሿ                                                                  (7) 
߬௜ ൌ ൛ݐ: ݐ ൐ 0, หݍ௜ሺݐሻ െ ݍ௘௜ሺݐሻห ൑ ߝ ≪ 1ൟ                                                                        (8)  
The division of the matrix ࡷ into the above metrics allow us to consider the 
multidimensional aspect of dynamic economic resilience, and in particular the trade-off that 
exists between the recovery time and the maximum loss of functionality, as shown in Fig. 2 
where both lines represent the behave of the sector having no initial perturbation. The metrics are 
put in relation each other in Eq. (9) under specific assumptions [12]Considering that ࣎௜ is function of ߙ௜ a parameter which is a measure of interdependency [23] and introducing another constant ߬௜ߙ௜ ൌ ܮ௜, the final dynamic decision space among ܨ௜, 	ݍ௜௠ and ߬௜ is obtained in Eq. (10) after some mathematical manipulations. 
 
 ࡹ ൌ ૚ െ ૚୘ ൣ૚ െ ܍ି۹ሾ۷ିۯ
∗ሿ࣎൧ሾ۹ሺ۷ െ ۯ∗ሻሿି૚ܙܕ                                                                  (9) 
ܯ௜ ൌ 1 െ ଵ௅೔் ሾ1 െ e
ି௅೔ሿ߬௜ݍ௜௠                                                                               (10)  
 
                     Figure 2. Trade-off between time to recovery and maximum inoperability (adapted from 
Pant et al. [2013]) 
The equations generate a decision space through contour curves that can be used to 
estimate the system performance. Below is described how the method can be used as decision 
support tool.  Considering that ܮ௜ is a measure of the amount of recovery and denoting with ݎ௜ ∈ሾ0,1ሿ the fraction of recovery from the observed maximum impact, ܮ௜	can be reformulated in Eq. (11).  
 
ܮ௜ ൌ ln ൬ ௤
೘೔
ሺଵି௥೔ሻ௤೘೔
൰                                                                                                           (11) 
 
Fig. 3 identifies the decision space of a representative economy where there are only two 
sectors. The contour curves are equal for both sectors obtained by assuming ݎ௜ ൌ 0.95 in order to address the time when the system recovers the 95% of the experienced loss.  
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 10 20 30
Fun
cti
on
alit
y Q
Time [t]
K2
K1
0.3 0.45
0.15 0.1
A*
1 0
0 1
K1
0.4 0
0 0.4
K2
q(0)
0
0.5
 Figure 3       (a)Contour curves of decision space for dynamic economic resilience 
        (b)Relationship between time to recovery and recovery rate 
 
Starting from the pair (ܯ௜, ݍ௠௜ሻ that indicates the desired level of overall operability during recovery, the recovery time is evaluated from Fig. 3a. Combining ߙ௜ and ߬௜ߙ௜ ൌ ܮ௜, we can graphically represent in Fig. 3b the relationship between the recovery rate and the recovery 
in Eq. (12). Entering in Fig. 3b with the evaluated recovery time, the recovery rate can be 
estimated and can be identified the sectors that need to more investments to maintain a similar 
level of functionality compared to the others 
 
݇௜௜ ൌ ௅೔ఛ೔ቀଵି∑ ఈ∗೔ೕ೙ೕసభ ቁ                  (12) 
 
Computable General Equilibrium Models 
 
CGE (i) are (usually) based on a system of non-linear equations and are more suitable to 
represent international and interregional competition with respect to I-O. On the other hand, they 
have a thin empirical base so often modelers are forced to make heroic assumptions regarding, 
production structure, and household behavior. The CGE set of equations adopted for the analysis 
of economic resilience must satisfy specific conditions as: market clearance of commodity, 
market clearance of factor, zero-profit and income balance. In particular, the algebraic 
framework can be derived distinguishing between consumers (households) and industry sectors 
(producers).  The problem of households is to maximize their utilities subject to the constraints 
of their incomes, while the problem of industries is to maximize the profit subject to the 
constraint of the production technology. These problems are solved by using the Lagrangian 
equations for the household’s utility and for the producer’s profit, that are shown respectively in 
Eq. (13), and Eq. (14) for a Cobb-Douglas economy. 
 
ࣦ஼ ൌ ݌௎ܷ െ ∑ ݌௜ܿ௜ே௜ୀଵ ൅ ߣ஼൫ܷ െ ܣ஼ ∐ ܿ௜ఈ೔ே௜ୀଵ ൯           (13) 
௝ࣦ௉ ൌ ݌௝ݕ௝ െ ∑ ݌௜ݔ௜௝ே௜ୀଵ െ ∑ ݓ௙ߥ௙௝ி௙ୀଵ ൅ ߣ௝௉ ቀݕ௝ െ ܣ௝ ∏ ݔ௜௝
ఉ೔ೕே௜ୀଵ ∏ ߥ௙௜
ఊ೑೔ி௙ୀଵ ቁ       (14) 
 
where: N and F are the types of commodities and primary factors respectively; U is an 
utility good generated by consumption; ݌௎, ݌௜, ݌௝, and ݓ௙ are respectively the prices of the utility 
good, the intermediate goods, the outputs, and the primary factors, AC and Aj are scaling 
parameters; ݔ௜௝ and ߥ௙௝ are respectively the amount of intermediate good i and the amount of 
primary factor f for the jth firm; ܿ௜ and ݕ௝ are the consumption of the commodity i and the output 
of the jth firm; ߙ௜ are the shares of each good in expenditure on consumption while ߚ௜௝ and ߛ௙௜ 
are the shares of each input in the cost of production. 
From Eq. (13) and Eq. (14), Wing [24] demonstrated how we can infer (i) the 
representative consumer’s demand function for the consumption of the ith commodity, (ii) the 
producer j’s demands for intermediate inputs of commodities, and (iii) the producer j’s demands 
for primary factor inputs. These demands are bound together by the economic assumptions of 
market clearance, zero-profit and income balance listed above, that once properly substituted 
yields two excess demand vectors that define the divergence ΔC between supply and demand in 
the market for each commodity and the divergence ΔF between supply and demand in the market 
for each primary factor, one excess profit vector Δπ and one excess income vector Δm. The 
absolute values of both of these sets of differences are minimized to zero to reach the general 
equilibrium. 
To address economic resilience estimation CGE models need to be calibrated considering 
data representing a benchmark economy. These data are usually taken from the SAM matrices 
[26] that are related to the mentioned I-O matrices. The most acknowledged methodology to 
compute regional economic resiliency to earthquakes or manmade disasters with CGE is the one 
introduced by Rose & Liao (2005), an approach able to consider one of the few advantages of I-
O over CGE, that is the clear distinction between direct and indirect impacts. 
The approach uses a multilayered CES (constant elasticity of substitution) production 
function for each sector. The initial values of the elasticities of substitution that represent how is 
easy is to substitute one input for the other are based on a careful synthesis of the literature. Each 
sectoral production function is extracted and the elasticities of substitutions are recalibrated with 
a numerical solution in order to match losses found by empirical estimate. Thereafter the 
recalibrated sectoral production functions are reinsert into the CGE model, the input supply is 
reduced to a level consistent with empirical estimates the total regional losses computed. Finally, 
subtracting direct losses from total losses the indirect losses are defined.  The outcome is a 
measure of resilience through two indices called DRER and TRER (Direct/Total Regional 
Economic Resilience), given in Eq. (15), and Eq. (16). 
 
ܦܴܧܴ ൌ %୼஽ொ೘ି%୼஽ொ%୼஽ொ೘               (15) 
ܴܶܧܴ ൌ %୼்ொ೘ି%୼்ொ%୼்ொ೘               (16) 
 
 where %Δܦܳ௠ and %Δܶܳ௠ are the maximum percent change in direct and total output, 
while %Δܦܳ and %Δܶܳare the estimated percent change in direct and total output. 
 
The Structural Dynamic Growth Model 
 
Li (2010) developed the structural growth model from the classical growth framework. 
Even if it was conceived as a growth model, it can also be well used to compute general 
equilibrium. The model represents the production processes in the economy through two 
matrices: the input and the output coefficient matrices. For example, for the economy described 
in Eq. (17) the two matrices are given in Eq. (18), and Eq. (19). 
 
൜ 280	quarters	wheat ൅ 12	tons	iron → 575	quarters	wheat120	quarters	wheat	 ൅ 	8	tons	iron		 → 20																tons	iron	       (17) 
 
࡭ ൌ ൤56/115 612/575 2/5൨              (18)  
࡮ ൌ ࡵ                (19) 
 
where the ith column in matrix ࡭ represents the standard input bundle of agent i. In the 
classical economic growth framework, the equilibrium price vectors and equilibrium output 
vectors are the left and right P-F eigenvectors of A. The Structural Dynamic Growth model tries 
to integrate the market mechanism into the classical growth model by embedding an exchange 
process in it which is represented by an exchange vector, in order to reach equilibrium. 
 
Exchange Process 
 
The exchange process considers the economy as a discrete-time dynamic system and supposes 
economic activities such as price adjustment, exchange and production occur in turn in each 
period.  With reference to the previous economic system, S in Eq. (20) denote the (n x m) 
supply matrix, and s in Eq. (21) denote the supply vector in the initial period. 
 
ࡿ ൌ ቂ575 00 20ቃ   ࢙ ൌ ቂ
575
20 ቃ             (20)  	           
Let z denote the vector consisting of purchase amounts of m agents, and z is called the 
purchase vector or exchange vector (of standard input bundles), Az is called the sales vector of 
goods.  It’s possible to derive Eq. (21) where ŝ represent the diagonal matrix with the vector s as 
the main diagonal and u the n-dimensional sales rate vector indicating the sales rates of n goods. 
 
ܝ ≡ ŝି૚ۯܢ               (21) 
 
Under the given price vector p, the purchase and sales values of m agents are ࢖′࡭ẑ and 
࢖′ûࡿ respectively. We suppose that the value of each agent purchases must be equal the value it 
sells, as in CGE income balance, so Eq. (22) is obtained.  
 
࢖′࡭ẑ ൌ ࢖′ûࡿ ≡ ࢖ᇱŝି૚࡭ࢠ෣ ࡿ               (22) 
 
When Eq. (23) holds and S’A is indecomposable it’s there exists a unique normalized exchange 
vector, and the unique maximal exchange vector can be found by following steps, which stands 
for the outcome of the exchange process: 
 
Step 1. Compute the matrix ࢖ᇱŝି૚࡭ࢠ෣ ࡿ; 
Step 2. Find the normalized right P-F eigenvector of Z, denoted by x; 
Step 3. Find the minimal component of ࡭ܠି૚෣࢙, denoted by ξ; 
Step 4. Compute the exchange vector ࢠ ൌ ξ࢙. 
 
So, it is assumed that the state of the economic system at a period t is represented by the 
variables p(t)=price vector; S(t) = supply matrix; u(t)=sales rate vector; z(t)=exchange vector and 
production intensity vector; Y(t)=Output matrix.  The market mechanism is embedded 
considering that in period t+1 the economy runs as in Eq. (23) until the time where the system 
reaches the equilibrium. 
 
- ࢖ሺݐ ൅ 1ሻ 	ൌ 	ܲሺ࢖ሺݐሻ, ࢛ሺݐሻሻ   
- ࡿሺݐ ൅ 1ሻ 	ൌ 	࡮ࢠሺݐሻ෢ ൅ ܳሺࢋ െ ࢛ሺݐሻ෣ ࡿሺݐሻሻ           (23) 
- ሺ࢛ሺݐ ൅ 1ሻ, ࢠሺݐ ൅ 1ሻሻ ൌ ܼሺ࡭, ࢖ሺݐ ൅ 1ሻ, ࡿሺݐ ൅ 1ሻሻ		
   
 where P represents price adjustment process, Q is the inventory depreciation function and 
stands for the depreciation process of inventories and Z is the exchange function depicted above. 
 
Application of Structural Growth Model Models to Evaluate Economic Resilience  
 
Starting from the I-O matrices representative of the economy in normal operating 
condition, a shock is applied to simulate to earthquakes or other disasters, modifying the 
exchange vector, which is the driver of the equilibrium process.  
 Figure 4. Restoration curves of the different economic sectors 
 
After the application of the shock, from the restoration curves of the system obtained in Fig. 4, 
the values of the economic resilience of the system can be quantified using the estimation 
procedure explained by Cimellaro et al. [22] that describes resilience as “the normalized shaded 
area underneath the function describing the functionality of a system”.  The model is also useful 
because it incorporates a series of parameter that controls the converging speed in case of 
availability of after-disruption data. Table 1 represent the comparison between the results 
obtained using the static and dynamic resilience analysis with IIM with the results obtained using 
SGM for the same representative economy under two different scenarios: great demand 
disruption in manufacturing (A) and great demand disruption in transportation (B). 
 
SGM  IIM 
A  B  A  B 
Resilience transportation 0.96  0.87  0.99 0.87 
Resilience manufacturing 0.97  0.90  0.94 0.92 
 
Table 1. Outcomes of the IIM and SGM resilience approaches under two scenarios 
 
 The outcomes of the two methods are similar, and underline the necessity to protect the 
transportation sector respect to the manufacturing one, because of the lower resiliency value of 
the scenarios B. However, the SGM is able to identify a non-dimensional measure that captures 
the dynamic dimension of the resilience. On the other hand, the IIM can be used to well-address 
the comparison between different strategies as described above in its dynamic decision space, but 
it doesn’t give as output a non-dimensional value for the economic resilience. 
 
Conclusion 
 
This paper summarizes and compares the methods adopted in modeling economic 
resilience. Two different approaches for the evaluation of the economic resilience have been 
described: the Inoperability Input-Output Model, and the CGE model. A new promising model, 
called the Structural Growth Model has been proposed to be used to evaluate the economic 
resilience index.  Critical comparison among the models is presented and applied to a specific 
case study to highlight differences, advantages and limitations of all approaches. 
 
Acknowledgments  
 
The research leading to these results has also received funding from the European 
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme - Marie Curie International Reintegration 
Actions-FP7/2007-2013 under the Grant Agreement n° PIRG06-GA-2009-256316 of the project 
ICRED - Integrated European Disaster Community Resilience 
 
References 
 
[1] Renschler C, Frazier A, Arendt L, Cimellaro GP, Reinhorn AM, Bruneau M. Framework for Defining and 
Measuring Resilience at the Community Scale: The PEOPLES Resilience Framework. MCEER Technical 
Report MCEER-10-006 (2010). University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, New York. 
[2] Cimellaro GP, Villa O, De Stefano A. Serviceability of Natural Gas Distribution Networks after Earthquakes. 
Journal of Earthquake and Tsunami (2013); 7(2): 22. 
[3] Cimellaro GP, Tinebra A, Renschler C, Fragiadakis M. Resilience-based design of an urban water distribution 
system. Journal of Structural Engineering ASCE (2013); in review.  
[4] Miles SB, Chang SE. Urban Disaster Recovery: A Framework and Simulation Mode. Technical Report 
MCEER-03-0005 (2003). Buffalo, NY; Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake Engineering Research, 
University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, New York. 
[5] Davidson R, Çagnan. Z. Restoration Modeling of Lifeline Systems. Research Progress and Accomplishments 
2003-2004 (2004). Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake Engineering Research, Buffalo, New York. 
[6] Haimes Y, Jiang P. Leontief-Based Model of Risk in Complex Interconnected Infrastructures. Journal of 
Infrastructures Systems (2001); 7(1):1–12. 
[7] Rose A, Liao S. Modeling Resilience to Disasters: Computable General Equilibrium Analysis of a Water 
Service Disruption. Journal of Regional Science (2005); 45(1):75-112. 
[8] Santos JR, Haimes YY.  Modeling the demand reduction input-output (I-O) inoperability due to terrorism of 
interconnected infrastructures. Risk Analysis (2004); 24:1437–1451. 
[9] Lian C, Haimes  YY. Managing the risk of terrorism to interdependent infrastructure systems through the 
dynamic inoperability input–output model. Systems Engineering (2006); 9:241–258. 
[10] Pant R, Barker K, Grant FH, Landers TL. Interdependent impacts of inoperability at multimodal transportation 
container terminals. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation (2011); 47(5):722–37. 
[11] Pant R, Barker K. Building dynamic resilience estimation metrics for interdependent infrastructures. In 
Proceedings of the European safety and reliability conference (2013); Helsinki, Finland.  
[12] Pant R, et al. Static and dynamic metrics of economic resilience for interdependent infrastructure and industry 
sectors. Reliability Engineering and System Safety (2013). 
[13] Konovalchuk V. A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis of the Economic Effects of the Chernobyl 
Nuclear Disaster. The Graduate School College of Agricultural Sciences (2006). The Pennsylvania State 
University. 
[14] Boisvert RN, Kay D, Turvey CG. Macroeconomic costs to large scale disruptions of food production: The case 
of foot- and-mouth disease in the United States. Economic Modelling (2012); 29(5):1921-1930. 
[15] Mitra-Kahn BH. Debunking the myths of computable general equilibrium models. SCEPA Working Paper 1 
(2008); 1–93. 
[16] Rutter M. Resilience as a dynamic concept. Dev Psychopathol (2012); 24(2):335-44. 
[17] Stokols D, Lejano R, Hipp  J. Enhancing the resilience of human-environment systems: a social ecological 
perspective. Ecology & Society (2013); 18(1):7. 
[18] Rose A. Economic Resilience to Disasters. Community and Regional Resilience Institute Report No 8 (2009). 
Oak Ridge, TN. 
[19] Li W. A Structural Growth Model and its Applications to Sraffa’s System. 18th International Input-Output 
Conference (2010). Sydney. 
[20] Cimellaro GP, Reinhorn AM, Bruneau M. Framework for analytical quantification of disaster resilience. 
Engineering Structures (2010); 32(11): 3639–3649. 
[21] Cimellaro GP, Reinhorn Andrei M, Bruneau M. Seismic resilience of a hospital system. Structure and 
Infrastructure Engineering (2010); 6(1-2): 127-144. 
[22] Leontief W. Input-output economics (1966), New York, Oxford University Press. 
[23] Oliva G, Panzieri S, Setola R. Agent-based input–output interdependency model. International Journal of 
Critical Infrastructure Protection (2010); 3(2):76–82. 
[24] Wing IS. Computable general equilibrium models and their use in economy-wide policy analysis. Technical 
Note, Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change (2004). MIT. 
[25] Relnert KA, Roland-Holst DW. Social accounting matrices. Applied methods for trade policy analysis: A 
handbook (1997), 94. 
[26] Shoven JB. Applying general equilibrium. Cambridge university press (1992).  
