High-Income Household Spending And The Economic Recovery

Cornell University ILR School 
DigitalCommons@ILR 
Federal Publications Key Workplace Documents 
4-2014 
High-Income Household Spending And The Economic Recovery 
Aaron E. Cobet 
Bureau of Labor Statistics 
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/key_workplace 
Thank you for downloading an article from DigitalCommons@ILR. 
Support this valuable resource today! 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Key Workplace Documents at DigitalCommons@ILR. 
It has been accepted for inclusion in Federal Publications by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@ILR. 
For more information, please contact catherwood-dig@cornell.edu. 
If you have a disability and are having trouble accessing information on this website or need materials in an 
alternate format, contact web-accessibility@cornell.edu for assistance. 
High-Income Household Spending And The Economic Recovery 
Abstract 
In late 2007, the United States fell into a "Great Recession." According to the National Bureau of Economic 
Research the recession officially ended in June 2009, but it took several more years for average 
household income and expenditures to exceed their 2008 levels in nominal terms. The recession lowered 
household income and consumer expenditures across all income groups. This Spotlight on Statistics 
examines trends in income and expenditures and how unevenly the gains were distributed across 
socioeconomic groups. 
Keywords 
household spending, recession, consumer expenditures, recovery, household income 
Comments 
Suggested Citation 
Cobet, A. E. (2014). High-income household spending and the economic recovery. Washington, DC: 
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
This article is available at DigitalCommons@ILR: https://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/key_workplace/1260 
U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS Spotlight on Statistics
Page 1
APRIL 2014
High-income Household Spending And The Economic Recovery
Aaron E. Cobet
In late 2007, the United States fell into a "Great Recession." According to the National Bureau of Economic Research the 
recession officially ended in June 2009, but it took several more years for average household income and 
expenditures to exceed their 2008 levels in nominal terms. The recession lowered household income and consumer 
expenditures across all income groups. This Spotlight on Statistics examines trends in income and expenditures and 
how unevenly the gains were distributed across socioeconomic groups.
U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS Spotlight on Statistics
Page 2
Income and expenditures have returned to 2008 levels
Average levels of income and expenditures have returned to prerecession levels in nominal dollars, which are not 
adjusted for price inflation. In 2011, average household income exceeded the 2008 level. Similarly, in 2012, average 
consumer expenditures exceeded 2008 levels.
U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS Spotlight on Statistics
Page 3
Income grew predominantly for the higher income quintiles
While average income has returned to prerecession levels, income gains have been distributed unevenly across 
income quintiles. (Income quintiles are five equally sized groups of households that have been divided from lowest to 
highest according to their annual income.) Between 2008 and 2012, the highest income quintile accounted for more 
than 80 percent of the total increase in household income in the United States. The fourth income quintile also 
experienced a significant gain between 2008 and 2012, while the lowest, second, and third income quintiles 
experienced essentially no change in income.
U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS Spotlight on Statistics
Page 4
Expenditures also grew more for the higher income quintiles
The expenditure gains were also distributed unevenly, but their distribution was less extreme than the distribution of 
income. Between 2008 and 2012, the expenditure increases of the highest income quintile accounted for almost half 
of the total spending gains across all five quintiles.
The expenditure increases of the fourth quintile were roughly equal to the combined spending increases of the lowest 
three quintiles. However, the second income quintile also recorded notable expenditure increases.
U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS Spotlight on Statistics
Page 5
Sources of increased expenditures in the highest quintile
Between 2008 and 2012, the highest income quintile increased overall spending by more than $2,300. Spending 
increased by about $3,800 in nine categories, while spending decreased by about $1,500 in five categories. 
The largest spending increases were for health care, transportation, and education. Health care spending increased 
because of higher expenditures for health insurance and medical supplies; transportation spending increased because 
of vehicle purchases; and education spending increased because of college tuition. The largest spending decreases 
were for housing.
U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS Spotlight on Statistics
Page 6
Sources of decreased expenditures in the lowest quintile
Between 2008 and 2012, the lowest income quintile decreased overall spending by about $150. Spending decreased 
by about $490 in seven categories and increased by about $340 in seven categories. 
The decline in spending was due to lower expenditures on apparel—specifically women’s apparel—and the main 
increase in spending was because of higher cash contributions. Cash contributions include money given to people or 
organizations outside the household, such as alimony payments or contributions to charitable organizations.
U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS Spotlight on Statistics
Page 7
Total household income and expenditures by income levels
The income and expenditure trends across different socioeconomic groups are more pronounced at the extremes of 
the income spectrum. Between 2004 and 2012, the total income of all households who earned more than $150,000 (7 
percent of the U.S. population in 2012) increased by 9 percent, while the total income of all households who earned 
less than $30,000 (33 percent of the population in 2012) decreased by 1 percent.
During the same time period, each income group’s expenditure trends behaved similarly to their income trends. The 
total expenditures of all households earning more than $150,000 increased by 9 percent, while the total expenditures 
of all households earning less than $30,000 increased only by 1 percent.
U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS Spotlight on Statistics
Page 8
More
Aaron E. Cobet is a senior economist in the Consumer Expenditure Survey Division, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
You can contact him at Cobet.Aaron@bls.gov.
The Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE survey) is a survey of about 70,000 households annually and obtains 
information on personal expenditures, income, and other demographic information. Expenditures refer to all personal 
expenses, such food, housing, or entertainment. Income refers to all personal income, such as wages or salaries, 
pensions, and unemployment or social security benefits. These expenditure and income data in the CE survey are all 
expressed in nominal U.S. dollars; they have not been adjusted for price changes.
The CE survey presents the data in different ways. One way is by income quintile. Quintiles are obtained by dividing 
the entire population in five income groups of equal size. Another way to present the data are by income segments, 
such as "less than $5,000" or "more than $150,000." The low income group of "$29,000 or less" was chosen to 
mitigate methodological issues associated with the accuracy of the estimates of income among low income groups. 
Part of the decline in income for the lower income group can be explained by income losses from self-employment or 
property.
Additional information on consumer expenditures are available on the CE website and in Consumer Expenditures in 2012.
