Assessment of Socio-Economic Sustainability and Resilience after COVID-19

Edited byAssessment of Socio-Economic Sustainability and Resilience after COVID-19Idiano D'AdamoPrinted Edition of the Special Issue Published in Sustainabilitywww.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilityAssessment of Socio-EconomicSustainability and Resilience afterCOVID-19Assessment of Socio-EconomicSustainability and Resilience afterCOVID-19EditorIdiano D’AdamoMDPI • Basel • Beijing • Wuhan • Barcelona • Belgrade • Manchester • Tokyo • Cluj • TianjinEditorIdiano D’AdamoDepartment of Computer,Control and ManagementEngineeringSapienza - Università di RomaRomeItalyEditorial OfficeMDPISt. Alban-Anlage 664052 Basel, SwitzerlandThis is a reprint of articles from the Special Issue published online in the open access journalSustainability (ISSN 2071-1050) (available at: www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability/special issues/economic resilience).For citation purposes, cite each article independently as indicated on the article page online and asindicated below:LastName, A.A.; LastName, B.B.; LastName, C.C. Article Title. Journal Name Year, Volume Number,Page Range.ISBN 978-3-0365-2721-5 (Hbk)ISBN 978-3-0365-2720-8 (PDF)© 2021 by the authors. Articles in this book are Open Access and distributed under the CreativeCommons Attribution (CC BY) license, which allows users to download, copy and build uponpublished articles, as long as the author and publisher are properly credited, which ensures maximumdissemination and a wider impact of our publications.The book as a whole is distributed by MDPI under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commonslicense CC BY-NC-ND.ContentsAbout the Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viiPreface to ”Assessment of Socio-Economic Sustainability and Resilience after COVID-19” . . ixStefano Cianciotta and Idiano D’AdamoThe Evolution of Sustainability: The Automotive Supply Chain Opportunity in Southern ItalyReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 10930, doi:10.3390/su131910930 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1Idiano D’Adamo and Gianluca LupiSustainability and Resilience after COVID-19: A Circular Premium in the Fashion IndustryReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 1861, doi:10.3390/su13041861 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7Fabio Giudice, Rocco Caferra and Piergiuseppe MoroneCOVID-19, the Food System and the Circular Economy: Challenges and OpportunitiesReprinted from: Sustainability 2020, 12, 7939, doi:10.3390/su12197939 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13Antonio Miceli, Birgit Hagen, Maria Pia Riccardi, Francesco Sotti and DavideSettembre-BlundoThriving, Not Just Surviving in Changing Times: How Sustainability, Agility and DigitalizationIntertwine with Organizational ResilienceReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 2052, doi:10.3390/su13042052 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29Muhammad Jawad Sajid and Ernesto D. R. Santibanez GonzalezThe Impact of Direct and Indirect COVID-19 Related Demand Shocks on Sectoral CO2Emissions: Evidence from Major Asia Pacific CountriesReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 9312, doi:10.3390/su13169312 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47Priom Mahmud, Sanjoy Kumar Paul, Abdullahil Azeem and Priyabrata ChowdhuryEvaluating Supply Chain Collaboration Barriers in Small- and Medium-Sized EnterprisesReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 7449, doi:10.3390/su13137449 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67Sushil and Periyasami AnbarasanOrganization’s Sustainable Operational Complexity and Strategic Overview: TISM Approachand Asian Case StudiesReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 9790, doi:10.3390/su13179790 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95Francisco M. Baena-Moreno, Isabel Malico and Isabel Paula MarquesPromoting Sustainability: Wastewater Treatment Plants as a Source of Biomethane in RegionsFar from a High-Pressure Grid. A Real Portuguese Case StudyReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 8933, doi:10.3390/su13168933 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127Mattia FerrariReflexive Governance for Infrastructure Resilience and SustainabilityReprinted from: Sustainability 2020, 12, 10224, doi:10.3390/su122310224 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145Andrea Appolloni, Nathalie Colasanti, Chiara Fantauzzi, Gloria Fiorani and Rocco FrondiziDistance Learning as a Resilience Strategy during Covid-19: An Analysis of the Italian ContextReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 1388, doi:10.3390/su13031388 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153vSara Alonso-Muñoz, Rocı́o González-Sánchez, Cristina Siligardi and Fernando E.Garcı́a-MuiñaNew Circular Networks in Resilient Supply Chains: An External Capital PerspectiveReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 6130, doi:10.3390/su13116130 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165Mohammad Faisal Khan, Asif Pervez, Umar Muhammad Modibbo, Jahangir Chauhan andIrfan AliFlexible Fuzzy Goal Programming Approach in Optimal Mix of Power Generation forSocio-Economic Sustainability: A Case StudyReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 8256, doi:10.3390/su13158256 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183Manel Arribas-Ibar, Petra A. Nylund and Alexander BremThe Risk of Dissolution of Sustainable Innovation Ecosystems in Times of Crisis: The ElectricVehicle during the COVID-19 PandemicReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 1319, doi:10.3390/su13031319 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211Idiano D’Adamo, Rocı́o González-Sánchez, Maria Sonia Medina-Salgado and DavideSettembre-BlundoE-Commerce Calls for Cyber-Security and Sustainability: How European Citizens Look for aTrusted Online EnvironmentReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 6752, doi:10.3390/su13126752 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225Idiano D’Adamo, Rocı́o González-Sánchez, Maria Sonia Medina-Salgado and DavideSettembre-BlundoMethodological Perspective for Assessing European Consumers’ Awareness of Cybersecurityand Sustainability in E-CommerceReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 11343, doi:10.3390/su132011343 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243Matthias Klumpp and Dominic LoskeSustainability and Resilience Revisited: Impact of Information Technology Disruptions onEmpirical Retail Logistics EfficiencyReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 5650, doi:10.3390/su13105650 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253Angela Ivette Grijalba Castro and Leonardo Juan Ramı́rez LópezSustainability and Resilience of Emerging Cities in Times of COVID-19Reprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 9480, doi:10.3390/su13169480 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273Veronika Bikse, Inese Lusena-Ezera, Peteris Rivza and Baiba RivzaThe Development of Digital Transformation and Relevant Competencies for Employees in theContext of the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic in LatviaReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 9233, doi:10.3390/su13169233 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287Ruiyu Sun, Siyao Zhang, Tianyu Wang, Jiarui Hu, Junhu Ruan and Junyong RuanWillingness and Influencing Factors of Pig Farmers to Adopt Internet of Things Technology inFood TraceabilityReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 8861, doi:10.3390/su13168861 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305Mohd Ashraf Zainol Abidin, Muhammad Nasiruddin Mahyuddin and MuhammadAmmirrul Atiqi Mohd ZainuriSolar Photovoltaic Architecture and Agronomic Management in Agrivoltaic System: A ReviewReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 7846, doi:10.3390/su13147846 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325viSungjo Hong and Seok-Hwan ChoiThe Urban Characteristics of High Economic Resilient Neighborhoods during the COVID-19Pandemic: A Case of Suwon, South KoreaReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 4679, doi:10.3390/su13094679 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353Hui Wang, Qing Wang and Xia ShengDoes Corporate Financialization Have a Non-Linear Impact on Sustainable Total FactorProductivity? Perspectives of Cash Holdings and Technical InnovationReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 2533, doi:10.3390/su13052533 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 393Dongyong Zhang, Mengge Hao and Stephen MorseIs Environmental Sustainability Taking a Backseat in China after COVID-19? The Perspectiveof Business ManagersReprinted from: Sustainability 2020, 12, 10369, doi:10.3390/su122410369 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411Benito Umaña-Hermosilla, Hanns de la Fuente-Mella, Claudio Elórtegui-Gómez andMarisela Fonseca-FuentesMultinomial Logistic Regression to Estimate and Predict the Perceptions of Individuals andCompanies in the Face of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the Ñuble Region, ChileReprinted from: Sustainability 2020, 12, 9553, doi:10.3390/su12229553 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 435Daniela Debone, Mariana V. da Costa and Simone G. E. K. Miraglia90 Days of COVID-19 Social Distancing and Its Impacts on Air Quality and Health in Sao Paulo,BrazilReprinted from: Sustainability 2020, 12, 7440, doi:10.3390/su12187440 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 455Sarbast Moslem, Tiziana Campisi, Agnieszka Szmelter-Jarosz, Szabolcs Duleba, Kh MdNahiduzzaman and Giovanni TesoriereBest–Worst Method for Modelling Mobility Choice after COVID-19: Evidence from ItalyReprinted from: Sustainability 2020, 12, 6824, doi:10.3390/su12176824 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 473Ángel Acevedo-Duque, Romel Gonzalez-Diaz, Elena Cachicatari Vargas, AnherysPaz-Marcano, Sheyla Muller-Pérez, Guido Salazar-Sepúlveda, Giulia Caruso and IdianoD’AdamoResilience, Leadership and Female Entrepreneurship within the Context of SMEs: Evidencefrom Latin AmericaReprinted from: Sustainability 2021, 13, 8129, doi:10.3390/su13158129 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 493viiAbout the EditorIdiano D’AdamoIdiano D’Adamo is an Associate Professor at Sapienza University of Rome. He worked in theUniversity of Sheffield, the National Research Council of Italy, Politecnico di Milano, Universityof L’Aquila and Unitelma Sapienza. In August 2015, he obtained the Elsevier Atlas Award. Hereceived two Excellence Review Awards: Waste Management in 2017 and Resources Conservationand Recycling in 2018. During its academic career, Idiano D’Adamo published 90 papers in theScopus database, reaching an h-index of 35. His current research interests are bioeconomy, circulareconomy, renewable energy, sustainability and waste management. Idiano is among 100,000 TopScientists for a global ranking in both 2019 and 2020. Idiano is Section Editor in Chief in Sustainability.He is Associate Editor in Resources, Conservation & Recycling Advances, Global Journal of FlexibleSystems Management and Frontiers in Sustainability. Idiano has participated in scientific researchprojects (Horizon 2020 “Star ProBio”, Life “Force of the Future”) and has collaborated with relevantnational institutes (MATTM, CNBBSV, SVIMEZ).ixPreface to ”Assessment of Socio-EconomicSustainability and Resilience after COVID-19”This Special Issue, titled “Assessment of Socio-Economic Sustainability and Resilience afterCOVID-19”, aims to propose the positive relationship between sustainability and resilience acrossmultiple sectors.Sustainability can promote a redistribution of people, since it is necessary to reduce the transferof many young people to densely populated cities and, likewise, induce a reverse path. This canhappen if two conditions are met: (i) attractive living conditions and (ii) present working conditions.It is indeed necessary to revitalize some territories and it is necessary to do this for future generations;for those who want to be protagonists in the social life giving a direct contribution. This society cannotremain deaf to this request because sustainability is the greatest opportunity for putting young peopleat the center of political action.A special thank you to my family, my friends, and my students. My goal is to enable them tobelieve in dreams, and to set shareable goals that look not only at self-interest, but at developingsocial equity. I think of Pope Giovanni Paolo II’s words during World Youth Day 2000: “You willdefend life at every moment of its earthly development, you will strive with all your energy to makethis earth more and more habitable for all.”This SI was made possible by the effort, talent and support of the Managing Editor, Ms YichenShen.Idiano D’AdamoEditorxisustainabilityEditorialThe Evolution of Sustainability: The Automotive Supply ChainOpportunity in Southern ItalyStefano Cianciotta 1 and Idiano D’Adamo 2,*Citation: Cianciotta, S.; D’Adamo, I.The Evolution of Sustainability: TheAutomotive Supply ChainOpportunity in Southern Italy.Sustainability 2021, 13, 10930.https://doi.org/10.3390/su131910930Received: 20 September 2021Accepted: 26 September 2021Published: 30 September 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional affil-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1 Abruzzo Sviluppo Spa, Corso Vittorio Emanuele 49, 65121 Pescara, Italy;stefanocianciotta@abruzzosviluppo.it2 Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome, Via Ariosto25, 00185 Rome, Italy* Correspondence: idiano.dadamo@uniroma1.itThis Special Issue titled “Assessment of Socio-Economic Sustainability and Resilienceafter COVID-19” aims to propose the positive relationship between sustainability andresilience across multiple sectors.COVID-19 is not the only problem that needs to be addressed at this time, as theenvironment has clearly shown signs of weakness. Urban centers are responsible for 80%of the world’s GDP, but they also produce 70% of the world’s CO2 emissions and consumeabout 70% of the world’s energy [1]. Moreover, it should be added that socio-economicinequality, unemployment, extreme poverty, unsustainable production and consumptionpatterns and environmental degradation demand urgent responses [2,3].Europe has launched an ambitious plan towards the European Green Deal and, tothis end, the Next Generation EU is a response to the socio-economic crisis caused by thepandemic. Some authors pointed out that it is necessary to develop the concept of the“sustainable hand”, which is the set of actions that determine the social optimum withina market. This concept looks at the long term and can be implemented by virtue of newparadigms of social norms, models developed and implemented to help govern socialinteractions towards a sustainable future [4].The manufacturing system highlights how innovation and sustainability can coexist,such that technological sustainability can be defined as a possible fourth dimension ofsustainable development [5]. Similarly, it is also necessary to ensure a proper combinationof sustainability and resilience [6]. This Editorial focuses on Italy, which will have afundamental role within the Next Generation EU, since it is the recipient of about onethird of the total available budget. In particular, it is necessary to overcome a significantproblem that is the territorial disparity, in which the northern regions tend to show moreperforming results than the southern ones. In particular, these regions show potential forsustainability [7]. The adoption of digital technologies can enable competitiveness, buteverything is linked to an effective collaboration between the different parties [8].In addition, the analysis focuses on the automotive industry that presents very sig-nificant numbers in the European landscape through direct and indirect jobs amountingto employment for 13.8 million Europeans, which corresponds to about 6.1% of total em-ployment. The European Union is among the world’s largest producers of motor vehiclesand the sector represents the largest private investor in research and development [9]. Theperformance of companies inferred from sustainability reports shows positive, but alsonegative performances. In particular, changes in organizational structures and appropriatepolicies have played an important role [10]. Sustainable manufacturing and green humanresources are identified as critical success factors in the automotive sector [11].The pandemic also affected the automotive sector, leading to a contraction in sales,however some companies have been able to absorb the contraction better. In particular, atthe Sevel plant located in Val di Sangro (located in the Abruzzo Region (South Italy)) newhires were made in July 2020 and January 2021 [12]. Sevel was born in 1981 as the joint1Sustainability 2021, 13, 10930venture between Fiat and Peugeot, now united in Stellantis (Stellantis is a multinationalcompany incorporated under Dutch law, born from the merger between the PSA andFiat Chrysler Automobiles groups) and is considered to be the most important Europeanproduction hub for light commercial vehicles. The company produces about 300 thousandvehicles per year. In particular, the Ducato is one of the most popular models globally and,with the shortening of production chains caused by the pandemic in the last year and ahalf, its production performance has increased significantly. In fact, the risks connectedto production chains that are too geographically extensive are increasingly perceivedby companies, just as the lack of production capacity in some areas (masks or vaccinesthemselves, for example) is perceived by public opinion to be an element of weakness ofthe entire system.Sevel has always been defined as a model company where the production rate was sohigh that it required the use of people on loan from other plants in the group and staff on‘staff-leasing’, i.e., on a temporary basis. The company therefore proved itself to be resilientto the pandemic, but the shortage of Bosch Abs control units from Malaysia has led to aslowing in the pace of work, with a reduction in production of commercial vehicles. Thisslowing down will lead to a reduction in work shifts (from 18 h to 15 h), for a companyin which work was done in shifts from Monday to Saturday and Sunday, including linemaintenance operations. This reduction in shifts has had an impact on the reduction ofpersonnel, which will involve laying off workers from other factories in the group andtemporary workers whose contracts will not be renewed. In addition, another importantelement related to the company was the opening of a plant in Gliwice (Poland) in 2019.This was a choice dictated by reasons of industrial policy, since the production saturation ofthe Abruzzo plant of Sevel prevented it from responding to the new production levels [12].In addition, the CEO of Stellantis, Carlos Tavares, announced that in the Termoli plant(located in the Molise Region (Southern Italy), which is about 70 km from Sevel) there willbe one of the five gigafactories for the production of batteries of the Stellantis group. Thisdecision will allow for the preservation of several jobs in the Termoli plant.Discussion and Policy ImplicationsThe pandemic has highlighted a sense of instability, with the closures of many busi-nesses prompting significant changes that will need to be examined over time. Onereflection we have come to is that the key role many businesses have taken on, the securitysystems already in place at these facilities, have enabled them not to close. However, lock-downs have also led to contractions in demand. Light vehicle production was not affected,but a long supply chain is responsible for the current crisis. Accordingly, the system hasbeen proven to be resilient. Human resources are the fulcrum on which to develop a sustainablesociety. This is an area rich in students and potential, as highlighted by Luca De Meo, theChairman of Renault [12]. The idea is to create a pole of sustainable automotive innovationin the Abruzzo and Molise cluster, using, first, all of the human resources acquired in recentyears in the group’s plants and then proceeding to a generational change. A challenge thatmust go beyond the automotive sector alone but must include all other sustainable spheres(e.g., production of renewable energy, energy efficiency, and re-use of materials) and digital;a team game that must involve all the surrounding industries, which represent a significantshare of the local economy. Too often, short-sightedness leads to the simple replacementof people, forgetting the added value that they have acquired over time, regardless ofthe organizational position held. Within the school of human relations, Argyris pointedout that we must bear in mind that the people employed by the organization have theirown personality. The individual evolves and seeks to achieve their own balances andis not only a subject of action, but also a subject of organizational learning. A necessarymutual balancing between personality and organization was therefore identified. Theobjective that is, therefore, posed in this work is twofold: (i) how to make this cluster glob-ally competitive and (ii) how to create a virtuous model of industry-tourism coexistence.On this last aspect, Sergio Marchionne (Former CEO of the Fiat-Chrysler Automobiles2Sustainability 2021, 13, 10930group and in 2011 defined among the 100 most influential people in the world by Timemagazine’s ranking) focused on 9 July 2013, asking in his last speech in Abruzzo at Sevel,for investment in roads, development of commercial ports, implementation of broadbandin industrial districts and also the design of tourism as a strategic asset.The concept of a sustainable hand is based on making people part of the change,in which there are not only rights but also tasks, all of which are for the good of societyas a whole. The binomial industry-tourism can call for appropriate lifestyles (e.g., diet,physical activity, stress reduction) which are possible in the territories examined, butsustainability must be achieved, i.e., leading companies and the entire supply chain mustbe able to compete on a global level. The challenge is by no means simple and requiresthe contribution of everyone in the formulation of ideas and strategies that can protectall the parties involved. This is a challenge in which everyone is called upon to makeproposals, but also to take steps backwards. It is a matter of developing a stable anddynamic relationship between internal and external organization. Within this cluster, itis necessary to combine production with research and development in order to developsynergies and attract talent. In this context, the support that can be guaranteed by theuniversities in the area becomes fundamental.The establishment of a true Abruzzo-Molise motor valley (specific automotive cluster,which in fact already exists because other 2500 people work in the Termoli plant today),would consolidate an industrial quadrilateral which, along with the Pomigliano D’Arco(Campania) and Melfi (Basilicata) plants, represents one of the most interesting productionpoles in Europe for the Stellantis Group.The crisis caused by Covid-19 is confirming the centrality of integrated logistics, inlight of the inevitable redefinition of industrial supply chains that will become increasinglyproximate.Logistics and industry, in fact, are the same thing, and it is no coincidence that Amazonhas invested precisely in the South of Abruzzo, creating one of the most important logisticspoles in Southern Europe.In today’s economy, industrial policy must favor processes of personnel training,technological and organizational innovation, reducing bureaucratic obstacles and makingservices available for efficient logistics.Just the integrated logistics is a further factor of aggregation and development of theautomotive quadrilateral of the Centre-South, which can be further strengthened by theestablishment in Abruzzo of a Special Economic Zone (SEZ) - see Cianciotta [13], whosepositive outcome will be determined by the value of integrated logistics and the quality ofservices provided.The Special Economic Zone of Puglia is already in force and also includes Molise,while that of Abruzzo must wait a few more months because the Decree of appointmentby the Government of the Commissioner Mauro Miccio is being registered at the Court ofAuditors.Our proposal, in order to increase the attractiveness of the entire Adriatic strip fromAbruzzo to Puglia, is to work towards the creation of a single SEZ.In fact, establishing a single Special Economic Zone of the Southern Adriatic wouldmean having several industrial clusters in strategic sectors for the relaunch of the economy(automotive and aerospace, for example), as well as having an integrated system of com-mercial port infrastructures (Vasto, Ortona, Brindisi and Bari), which would be particularlyadvantageous, both in terms of negotiations with multinationals already operating withinthis large area, and in terms of attracting investment.If to the inevitable relapses on the territories, we add also that the Marche (to whoseinside of the Harbor Authority figure also the Abruzzo) and the same Molise are regionsin transition, this means that within a communitarian program, these regions will assignapproximately 6% more of their resources to Italy, and it is estimated that, to these tworegions, from 10% to 20% of greater contributions can be attributed.3Sustainability 2021, 13, 10930The Marche region itself is also working on obtaining a SEZ, which will have differentcriteria from those established with Government Decree No. 91 in 2017 that constituted theSEZs for the regions of Southern Italy, but which is still a novelty in terms of measures forattracting investment.It is here, then, that the central-southern Adriatic would find itself united with ameasure that could determine and increase its potential, especially in a strategic momentfavorable to the resumption of maritime trade on the Mediterranean, which has returned toplay an important role after the doubling of the Suez Canal and with the redefinition of theroutes due to the pandemic (on the Mediterranean’s contribution to economic development,see the monographic issue of Limes [14].).Finally, sustainability can promote a redistribution of people, since it is necessary toreduce the transfer of many young people to densely populated cities and, likewise, inducea reverse path.This can happen if two conditions are met: (i) attractive living conditions and (ii)present working conditions. It is indeed necessary to revitalize some territories and it isnecessary to do this for future generations; for those who want to be protagonists in thesocial life giving a direct contribution. This society cannot remain deaf to this requestbecause sustainability is the greatest opportunity for putting young people at the center ofpolitical action.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.C. and I.D.; writing—Original draft preparation, S.C.and I.D.; writing—Review and editing, S.C. and I.D. All authors have read and agreed to thepublished version of the manuscript.Funding: This research received no external funding.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.Acknowledgments: This work is dedicated to all the young people who work in Sevel and in allthe plants of the group, so that all their sacrifices are valued and new young people can becomecolleagues. The realization of young people’s dreams is the compass of our action.Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.References1. The World Bank Urban Development. Available online: https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/urbandevelopment/overview(accessed on 27 August 2021).2. D’Amico, G.; Taddeo, R.; Shi, L.; Yigitcanlar, T.; Ioppolo, G. Ecological indicators of smart urban metabolism: A review of theliterature on international standards. Ecol. Indic. 2020, 118, 106808. [CrossRef]3. D’Amico, G.; Arbolino, R.; Shi, L.; Yigitcanlar, T.; Ioppolo, G. Digital Technologies for Urban Metabolism Efficiency: Lessons fromUrban Agenda Partnership on Circular Economy. Sustainability 2021, 13, 6043. [CrossRef]4. D’Adamo, I.; Morone, P.; Huisingh, D. Bioenergy: A Sustainable Shift. Energies 2021, 14, 5661. [CrossRef]5. Vacchi, M.; Siligardi, C.; Demaria, F.; Cedillo-González, E.I.; González-Sánchez, R.; Settembre-Blundo, D. Technological Sustain-ability or Sustainable Technology? A Multidimensional Vision of Sustainability in Manufacturing. Sustainability 2021, 13, 9942.[CrossRef]6. D’Adamo, I.; Rosa, P. How Do You See Infrastructure? Green Energy to Provide Economic Growth after COVID-19. Sustainability2020, 12, 4738. [CrossRef]7. D’Adamo, I.; Falcone, P.M.; Imbert, E.; Morone, P. Exploring regional transitions to the bioeconomy using a socio-economicindicator: The case of Italy. Econ. Polit. 2020. [CrossRef]8. Lepore, D.; Micozzi, A.; Spigarelli, F. Industry 4.0 Accelerating Sustainable Manufacturing in the COVID-19 Era: Assessing theReadiness and Responsiveness of Italian Regions. Sustainability 2021, 13, 2670. [CrossRef]9. European Commission Automotive Industry. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/automotive_en (accessedon 16 September 2021).10. Sukitsch, M.; Engert, S.; Baumgartner, R.J. The Implementation of Corporate Sustainability in the European Automotive Industry:An Analysis of Sustainability Reports. Sustainability 2015, 7, 11504–11531. [CrossRef]4Sustainability 2021, 13, 1093011. Gedam, V.V.; Raut, R.D.; Lopes de Sousa Jabbour, A.B.; Narkhede, B.E.; Grebinevych, O. Sustainable manufacturing and greenhuman resources: Critical success factors in the automotive sector. Bus. Strateg. Environ. 2021, 30, 1296–1313. [CrossRef]12. Cianciotta, S. Per un Nuovo Ecosistema Industriale in Abruzzo; Textus Edizioni: L’Aquila, Italy, 2021.13. Cianciotta, S. Il ruolo delle Zone economiche speciali in Italia: Alcuni casi di studio. In Ripartire dai Borghi per Cambiare le Città;FrancoAngeli Editore: Milano, Italy, 2020.14. Limes L’Italia è il Mare; GEDI Gruppo Editoriale S.p.A.: Torino, Italy, 2020.5sustainabilityEditorialSustainability and Resilience after COVID-19: A CircularPremium in the Fashion IndustryIdiano D’Adamo 1,* and Gianluca Lupi 2Citation: D’Adamo, I.; Lupi, G.Sustainability and Resilience afterCOVID-19: A Circular Premium inthe Fashion Industry. Sustainability2021, 13, 1861. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13041861Academic Editor: Marc RosenReceived: 2 February 2021Accepted: 5 February 2021Published: 9 February 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional affil-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1 Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome,Via Ariosto 25, 00185 Rome, Italy2 Accademia del Lusso, Via Montenapoleone 5, 20121 Milan, Italy; gianluca.lupi@gmail.com* Correspondence: idiano.dadamo@uniroma1.itCOVID-19 has challenged so many of humanity’s certainties, but it has also shown thatwe are able to react to serious threats. Moreover, it is possible to see a great opportunity: tocreate a real, sustainable renaissance. However, the challenge is so complex that it requiresthe involvement of as many categories of stakeholders as possible, and the implementationof low-carbon models in different production sectors [1].A single closed-loop supply chain can be reconfigured as a multi-loop system, inwhich both reused and recycled materials from a previous life cycle are reintroduced intothe market as new products and values. In particular, this editorial focuses on on thefashion industry, which unquestionably characterizes the lives of all citizens and identifiesa potential circular premium.1. The Circular Economy Is the Cure that Can Give Oxygen to the Linear Economy andConsumption ModelLarge players in the fashion industry have the opportunity to introduce and reinforcesustainability obligations by accelerating and introducing structural changes such as re-ducing seasonal clothing in favor of a circular economic model. To address this type ofchange, they will need to reformulate their strategy by first identifying and then capturingthe competitive advantage by having at their disposal sustainable policies that can fostergreater resilience. As Einstein stated, “ . . . it is crisis that brings progress. It is in crisis thatinventiveness, discovery and great strategy are born”.The time is right to enact a much-needed change to re-invent the fashion industry.A more resilient, anti-fragile and fair future can begin in the post-pandemic period. Cir-cularity is the asset that can surely lead to an ethical and responsible improvement onboth the production and consumption sides. It must be understood that an extremely highnumber of garments in one’s closet certainly doesn’t help anyone; if anything, it adds to thegrowth of waste and a greater consumption of both water and energy. It is not necessarilytrue that a garment purchased the previous year must be thrown away. Our system ofconsumerism and capitalism has educated us to accept an economic a model where everyweek trendy fashion groups propose new collections, triggering the need for novelty to thedetriment of recently purchased garments, considered outdated and not fashionable.Circularity serves to reduce the amount of waste by preventing it from ending up inlandfills or being incinerated. In order to interrupt this wastefulness in the medium-longterm, it is therefore necessary to make products with eco-sustainable materials from thevery beginning of production. Linked to this is the problem of finding a solution for theimmense amount of waste that already exists and will continue to exist in the transition tothe circular economic model.The need to design a future of well-being through sustainable design requires im-mediate action. Companies can adopt many strategies: (i) reorienting purchase methodstowards renting; (ii) selling garments by subscription; and (iii) repairing or regeneratinga garment, thereby creating a product with an infinite life cycle. It is interesting to note7Sustainability 2021, 13, 1861that in this alternative business model, productive attention is not directed solely at how aproduct is made but rather at how it is disassembled and recycled.We could then make this assumption: the end of the product in strategic planningis the beginning of invention: upstream a new process will be developed through whichmaterials will not become harmful or toxic waste. The circular economy can be the meansto regenerate the linear model of production and consumption.Fashion, as Oekom Research mentioned, is one of the most polluting industries in theworld, causing enormous environmental damage. Half, or nearly half, of all the clothesproduced in the world are made of polyester, a byproduct of crude oil. This certainlyresults in a durable product, but it makes the entire production process fragile. That iswhy it makes sense to use of not only classic, conventional raw materials (such as cotton,jute, and silk) but also the wide range of underrated sustainable fibers. The use of thesenatural resources for the production of clothing is found in many cultures. For example,in some countries the highest quality clothing is produced from lotus fiber, harvestedfrom the lotus stem, and pineapple leaves are referred to as elite fibers. This is becausenormal cotton production process has a negative impact on environmental sustainability.In fact, high-intensity cultivation creates high water consumption, degrades soil fertility,and leaves a carbon footprint. For this reason, it is necessary to be aware that if there isan increase in demand for consumption after COVID-19, the fashion system will have toadopt resilient production models. A possible approach is to consider how agriculture canprovide organic raw materials by diversifying primary products through crops of banana,pineapple, coffee, or bamboo. In this way, sustainable and superior quality products willbe created, the agricultural method will regenerate the soil, and the carbon problem will bediminished or eliminated by improved biodiversity.2. Consumers and Businesses Directed to Follow a Green PathWhen analyzing and studying the circular economy in the fashion industry, it is usefulto consider research that highlights how consumers and companies feel about sustain-ability. McKinsey conducted an important survey in April 2020 (Consumer Sentimenton Sustainability in Fashion) of 2000 British and German consumers. Two-thirds of theinterviewees affirmed following issues: (i) the use of sustainable materials is an importantdriver towards the final purchase (67%); (ii) brands should be totally transparent aboutsustainability (70%); (iii) the delay of new collections is not a problem (65%); (iv) thereis a propensity to repair items in order to prolong their use (57%); (v) there is a frequentpurchase of durable fashion items (65%); (vi) keeping items longer (71%). The research alsoshows that the target audience of Generation Z and millennials has a strong propensity topurchase second-hand items.Taking into account how purchasing habits are changing, and considering the latestreport of LifeGate’s National Observatory on Sustainable Lifestyle, we can see that ifonly 7% of respondents in 2016 claimed to buy natural clothing, this sample would haveincreased to 16% in three years. The growth of this change is mainly driven by the youngergenerations (as highlighted above). The state-of-fashion report prepared by BoF togetherwith McKinsey showed that 31% of consumers born after 1996 say they would be willingto pay more for products with a lower environmental impact. Of these, 26% were from thegeneration born between 1982 and 1995 and 17% were from Generation X. This profoundattention to the need for better, sustainable goods has further promoted the concept of buyless, buy better.This change has also led to the management of large fashion companies to start fol-lowing a greener path. Companies have understood how a sustainable model can producea competitive advantage in reputation and differentiation. For this reason, the big fashionhouses are committed to developing policies that encourage and improve sustainability.During the pandemic period, this trend has greatly accelerated. The Kering Group,for example, to which Gucci, Bottega Veneta, Balenciaga and Yves Saint Laurent belong,was selected during the Word Economic Forum as seventh out of over 8000 companies8Sustainability 2021, 13, 1861for its commitment to green production. Several years ago, the group has also launched aproduct line composed mainly of renewable raw materials. In 2018, it also published theKering Standards: industry-leading environmental and social requirements for its brandsand suppliers. Maire-Claire Daveu, the Kering Group’s head of sustainability said, “Ourambition is to redefine luxury to help influence and drive these positive changes.”The LVMH group, which includes Dior, Fendi and Loro Piana, has introduced the LIFEprogram (actions aimed at the environmental performance of LVMH and its maisons withthe goal of reducing CO2 emissions. Prada, on the other hand, supports the sustainabilitymanifesto for Italian fashion and is a member of the Commission for Sustainability, Ecologyand the Environment. It has also contributed to the guidelines on eco-toxicological re-quirements for clothing, leather goods, footwear and accessories that introduce parametersfor the use of chemicals to improve product safety and reduce pollution. Strong in thisdirection is also the action of Valentino, one of the first brands to join Greenpeace’s Detoxprotocol, a campaign to eliminate harmful chemicals from the fashion industry productionchain. “Being nature-positive means being business-positive,” declares Marco Bizzarri,CEO of Gucci.3. A Circular Premium in the Fashion IndustryLarge companies also have the advantage of having bodies or guides that highlightwhat models to follow to create responsible and sustainable strategies. One of the mostimportant authorities is the Global Fashion Agenda, which is proposed annually by theCopenhagen Fashion Summit. Abolishing the “take, make, dispose” economic modelwould mean reducing the problem of unsold goods, which is responsible for a good 73% ofgarments ending up in landfills. This institution has proposed as priorities several linesto be followed, among which we highlight: (i) traceability throughout the productionchain; (ii) climate change conversion; (iii) efficient use of energy and water; (iv) a safeworking environment that respects universal human rights; (v) investment in innovativeand sustainable fibers; and (vi) a circular strategy.Starting from this approach, Figure 1 proposes some lines of action that could beimplemented to highlight how the sustainable transition, which will affects the fashionindustry, will also have resilience in other sectors [2,3]. Within the fashion industry, themarket analyses above have highlighted how new market segments are maturing and hownecessary it is to capture this change to prevent the development of disruptive approachesby competitors.Figure 1. A circular strategy in the fashion industry.9Sustainability 2021, 13, 1861In order to promote a circular strategy, companies should be interested in increasingtheir green reputation, which not only means making changes to the supply chain, butalso adopting a systemic change in which the company moves beyond its own sphere, topromote initiatives aimed at increasing community sensitivity towards the great challengeof climate change.Regarding the specifics of the internal actions that need to be taken, eco-design isfundamental because a correct design at the beginning will allow a product to be disposedof properly at the end of its useful life. Changing the supply of raw materials is the nextstep because using bio-based materials will reduce the impact on other eco-systems muchas the “reuse, recycle, recovery” of products already used can be re-introduced into themarket to favor a multi-loop model.The operational and distribution phases may require the excessive use of differentutilities. To this end, the various textile production plants must be able to reduce water andenergy consumption in addition to reducing the use and release of harmful chemicals. Theaction of energy efficiency can be supported by the use of energy produced from renewablesources, and the same can be done during the distribution phase through green fuels.Human relations theory has highlighted how a mix of formal and informal factors canbe identified in the organizational context. Some aspects such as health, safety, diversityand gender equality, should be ever-present requirements. This pandemic period hasput the emphasis back on the relevance of human relations by fostering the concept ofresponsible human capital management.Traceability makes it possible to identify where to concentrate resources, and thisstrategy of total transparency will allow consumers and investors to analyze the impactof their products. Digitization can aid traceability in a sector such as textiles, which ischaracterized by a fragmented structure. Traceability in the product realization phase istherefore very complex, but no less so for the consumer. Customer loyalty can take placein different ways, but in a circular perspective it is important to encourage the returnof products that are no longer desired or usable. In the first case, the garment is givena new owner; in the second case, the materials are given a new life cycle. This can bedone by returning them to stores, but also to specialized collection centers by means ofagreements. Furthermore, it is necessary to investigate the relationship between traceabilityand e-commerce sales channels. In fact, the pandemic period has seen a propensity towardssuch use. Packaging plays a key role in a circular model, but future studies will need toexplore the sustainability of this sales channel compared to the traditional one.Companies called to redesign their production process to include the acquisition ofnatural raw materials could incur higher costs. Would consumers be willing to pay more?Thus, companies will have to balance return with risk because not making that choicecould mean losing current customers as well as future ones. Consumers may be willing toaccept that a circular price (i.e., the price required for a 100% bio-based product obtainedwith a sustainable approach) is different from the normal price (i.e., the price they currentlypay for fossil fuel-based products). We can therefore introduce in the literature a new termcalled “the circular premium”, which measures the difference between the circular priceand the normal price. In addition, a further question to analyze is how to establish therelationship between the circular premium and the percentage of bio-based material in theproducts. The determining of this percentage will not be easy, but it is crucial to identifyingwhich products (clothing) are truly sustainable. In addition, the circular premium mayvary depending on the recipient (e.g., children) or use (e.g., underwear).In this transition, a sustainability assessment is complex. The analysis must cover thelife cycle of the whole product and be compared to a product manufactured under currentconditions (totally fossil fuel-based or partially obtained from bio-based materials andrenewable energies). However, the assessment cannot focus only on the environmental com-ponent; the social and human component cannot take a back seat. Sustainable certificationmust include these aspects in order to allow a fair comparison between companies.10Sustainability 2021, 13, 1861Furthermore, incentives are necessary to foster a circular model. The objective couldbe achieved through different but also complementary actions: producers would supplythe raw materials and modify the production processes; consumers would encourage thecollection of the product and do not dispose of it as undifferentiated; and third partieswould set up reuse, recycling and recovery plants. Future policy perspectives will identifythe most appropriate tool to foster the development of circular models. Good intentionsare worthless if they are not translated into concrete actions.“Sustainability is the organizing principle on which to build the future of the fashionindustry, more resilient than ever,”declared Eva Kruse, CEO of Global Fashion Agenda.The pandemic period has caused severe socio-economic damage, but it is accompanied byenvironmental deterioration that can also affect economic opportunities and social equity.In the face of this double risk, future generations are ready to be resilient and make theircontribution not only on the consumption side but also through their inclusion in fashioncompanies by bringing green and circular principles with them. Policy makers can alsofavor this choice. We think that human strength is resilient by overcoming shocks resultingfrom economic crises or natural disasters when wearing clothing made form sustainablematerial and with rainbow colors. Sustainability allows the fashion industry to determinevalue not only in the aesthetic direction but also in the ethical one.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, I.D. and G.L.; writing—Original draft preparation, G.L.;writing—Review and editing, I.D. and G.L. All authors have read and agreed to the published versionof the manuscript.Funding: This research received no external funding.Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.References1. D’Adamo, I.; Falcone, P.M.; Martin, M.; Rosa, P. A sustainable revolution: Let’s go sustainable to get our globe cleaner.Sustainability 2020, 12, 4387. [CrossRef]2. Elmqvist, T.; Andersson, E.; Frantzeskaki, N.; McPhearson, T.; Olsson, P.; Gaffney, O.; Takeuchi, K.; Folke, C. Sustainability andresilience for transformation in the urban century. Nat. Sustain. 2019, 2, 267–273. [CrossRef]3. D’Adamo, I.; Rosa, P. How do you see infrastructure? Green energy to provide economic growth after COVID-19. Sustainability2020, 12, 4738. [CrossRef]11sustainabilityArticleCOVID-19, the Food System and the CircularEconomy: Challenges and OpportunitiesFabio Giudice 1, Rocco Caferra 2 and Piergiuseppe Morone 3,*1 Department of Law, Economics, Politics and Modern Languages, LUMSA University of Rome,00193 Rome, Italy; fabiogiudice@outlook.com2 Department of Economics, Management and Law, University of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy;rocco.caferra@gmail.com3 Bioeconomy in Transition Research Group (BiT-RG), University of Rome Unitelma Sapienza,00161 Rome, Italy* Correspondence: piergiuseppe.morone@unitelmasapienza.itReceived: 4 August 2020; Accepted: 22 September 2020; Published: 25 September 2020Abstract: This paper analyzes the causes and effects of the COVID-19 crisis, with a specific focuson the food system. Food consumption and production has not only been impacted by the crisis,but it may have also contributed to causing the pandemic. After providing a brief introductoryframework, the paper presents the results of a pilot study on the link between COVID-19 and thefood system, as indicated by the social media activity of selected European Union (EU) Twitteraccounts, measured using an original “theme popularity” metric. Thereafter, a systematic reviewof the literature is proposed to identify the causes of the rise in popularity of a sustainable foodsystem theme, the potential consequences of the COVID-19 crisis for the food system (targeting theproduction, consumption and waste disposal phases) and possible solutions, focusing on the circulareconomy. Challenges and opportunities for policymakers in the short and long term are discussed.A holistic approach is advocated, as the global food system is intimately connected with society andrequires deep cooperation among nation states and economic actors.Keywords: COVID-19; food system; circular economy; sustainability; EU; Twitter1. IntroductionThe COVID-19 pandemic has generated a huge economic crisis and exposed many of the fallaciesof the current world economic system, including the food system [1]. The aim of this paper is twofold:first, it aims at identifying the rise and fall of specific narratives related to the food system duringthe pandemic by means of a content analysis of social media content. This analysis will show howissues associated with the food system gained centrality throughout the lockdown, raising questionsregarding the (lack of) sustainability and resiliency of the food system. Subsequently, it will presentthe preliminary findings of a systematic literature review aimed at identifying possible solutions forimproving the food system within the recent scholarly debate. These two objectives represent, in theauthors’ view, two faces of the same coin. By addressing them simultaneously, we seek to present afull picture of how discourse around the food system (in the context of the COVID-19 emergency) isbeing shaped and communicated in the interest of developing solutions.Communication strategies are important, especially in social and political contexts, as they offerthe possibility to introduce and attract attention to new problems. To this extent, the disseminationof information is crucial in tracking the path that society should follow, as well as raising publicawareness of the importance of particular issues. Hence, it is important to investigate how experts andpolicymakers propose solutions and inform citizens about the food system. Their methods for doing13Sustainability 2020, 12, 7939so, as discussed in the current work, might influence subjects’ attitudes, behaviors and beliefs aboutadopting more sustainable practices.The present analysis starts by framing the sustainability issue against the contemporary backdropof the health and economic crisis effected by COVID-19 (Section 2). As the pandemic is a contingentmatter that has yet to unfold its deepest consequences, we will only seek to evaluate its possibleeconomic repercussions. There are divergent opinions on this matter, but one certainty is that the crisiswill leave a mark and question the global economic order, as never before. We will explore the deepcauses of the pandemic and the connection between COVID-19 and the current food system, which hasexposed the fallacies of the latter.Subsequently, we will analyze the communication strategy adopted by particular social mediaaccounts (Section 3). As mentioned, we will specifically investigate the dynamics of European Union(EU) communications related to the food system. Our social media content analysis will aim atassessing: (1) how the COVID-19 pandemic has re-shaped the EU’s social media agenda with respectto the food system and the circular economy; and (2) how themes relating to the food system and thecircular economy have evolved/co-evolved over the period of the pandemic and gained momentumamongst EU citizens. To this end, we will focus on Twitter posts, as these enable the re-constructionof social networks, comprised of vertexes (i.e., people, institutions) and links (connections betweenaccounts, people and institutions).In Section 4, we will analyze possible solutions identified in the recent literature, placing particularlyattention on how the European food system might be revolutionized by the introduction of circulareconomy principles, also in light of the COVID-19 crisis. We will focus on the potential for circulareconomy solutions to impact all three stages of the food system—production, consumption andwaste disposal.Finally, we will summarize the interconnections between COVID-19, the food system and thecircular economy. While there remains much work to be done to facilitate the transition to a moresustainable food system, many instruments have already been set out for this purpose. Within thecontext of the current pandemic, a socio-economic and political international shift could ease theprocess towards achieving a more sustainable and circular food system.2. How COVID-19 Has Affected Our Lifestyles: The Main PictureIn January 2020, a previously unknown virus (then named SARS-CoV-2) was identified in China.A few weeks later, an outbreak that would soon be defined by the WHO as a pandemic began to test thehealth care systems of both advanced and developing countries. Lockdown measures were enforcedto slow the spread of the virus and the mortality of the infectious disease. As a result, people wereforced to stay at home, with a significant impact on economic activity and daily lifestyles. Accordingly,a symmetric shock on both demand and supply unfolded, with consequences for the world economy.The COVID-19 pandemic differs from many previous pandemics in its wide spread through manycountries. While the outbreak started in China, the world’s leading manufacturer, it soon spread acrossthe world, significantly affecting the US, Japan, Germany, France and Italy—all G7 countries with asignificant role in the world economy and global value chains [2]. The COVID-19 crisis is complex inmany ways, and it will leave its mark not only on public health, but also on the globalized economy,as previously conceived. A recent study found that countries with higher levels of socio-economicglobalization have been more severely exposed to the virus [3]. Indeed, as Baldwin and Di Mauro [2]point out, companies, individuals and governments are experiencing disruptions that may eventuallylead to deglobalization, as companies are quickly learning the risks involved in global supply chains.Moreover, as stated in Renzo et al. [4], COVID-19 represents a massive challenge for publichealth, since the forced isolation has generated noticeable changes in daily lifestyles [5]. In particular,following the main focus of this paper, such sudden lifestyle changes might have both positive andnegative impacts on food consumption. Existing studies are controversial in this sense, since somestudies—such as [4]—have found evidence of healthier lifestyles during the lockdown, while others14Sustainability 2020, 12, 7939have revealed problems emerging from unsafe lifestyles during quarantine [6]. The pandemic hasalso abruptly changed food consumption habits in the short term, and it remains to be seen whetherthese changes will persist over time. As for the immediate reaction to the crisis, when people firstlearned about the forced lockdown measures, they rushed to grocery stores to fill their pantries. In areport dated March 2020, the Institute of Services for the Agri-Food Market (ISMEA) showed thatpanic buying was people’s first instinctive reaction [7]. Accordingly, global supermarket shelvesemptied of key food items, such as pasta, rice, canned goods, flour, frozen foods and bottled water [8],raising questions about the overall sustainability and resilience of the food system.As will be discussed in the following section, the impact of COVID-19 on the food systemhas been well reflected in the EU’s social media discourse about the food system throughout thepandemic period.3. Evidence from Social Media: A Pilot StudyIn this pilot study, we detect the rise and fall of specific narratives related to the food system.On the one hand, by employing an open source dataset of Twitter posts (i.e., ‘tweets’) about COVID-19,we show the general increase in public attention related to food themes during the pandemic. On theother hand, we investigate how the EU has directed greater attention to the sustainability of the foodsystem. Following a brief discussion of the role played by social networks in disseminating information(Section 3.1), we will introduce a metric of theme popularity (Section 3.2) and use this to analyze publicinterest (Section 3.3) in the food system and the emergence and dynamics of EU narratives around thefood system (Section 3.4).3.1. How Social Networks Disseminate InformationAs discussed in several studies [9,10], the information provided by the media is of fundamentalimportance for policymaking, as it signals which issues are gaining traction, which are falling out offavor, and which have been introduced as entirely new problems for the public to digest. During theInternet era, the birth of social media provided the opportunity—even in political contexts (see,e.g., Neuman et al. [11])—for information to be disseminated at a low cost [12]. Many studies onsocial media have focused on the growth in popularity of social media platforms during electionseasons, by observing the communication of politicians and political parties [13]. Other studies haveaddressed the interaction and influence between political social media posts and the public [14],investigating how policy agendas are often settled as a result of the interrelation between interestgroups. A complete review of how Twitter data have been exploited to analyze the public debate canbe found in Korakakis et al. [15]. Interestingly, Gandy [12] focused on how political agendas are builtand, as defined in their paper, the process by which the news determines what is publishable andthe way in which elected officials shift issues on the policy agenda based on the media and, in turn,the public.Different from traditional media data, Twitter data allow for the re-construction of social networks,comprised of vertexes (i.e., people, institutions) and links (connections between accounts, people andinstitutions). In particular, Twitter reveals the number of accounts observing the activity of a specificaccount (i.e., the latter’s number of followers). Via this metric, one can identify the in-degreecentrality [16] of an account, which can be exploited as a measure of user popularity. Using such data,studies have explored how central nodes influence behavior among followers (see, e.g., Chen et al. [17]).Beyond this, Twitter provides several tools for analyzing the accounts that disseminate informationand the nature of that disseminated information.As mentioned in the previous section, the COVID-19 pandemic has raised new challenges withrespect to virtuous behavior and the transition to a more sustainable and resilient food system. On theone hand, it is worth analyzing the public’s general increase in interest in this issue. On the otherhand, it is also relevant to analyze how political actors set the tone for this issue via their social mediacommunication by (i) communicating and disseminating information about actions, interests and15Sustainability 2020, 12, 7939progress relating to specific themes, and (ii) inducing their network of followers to pro-activelycooperate to achieve the proposed ends. While content analysis has been extensively used to analyzethe ways in which actors influence public opinion on environmental themes [18,19], to the best of ourknowledge, no prior study has performed a content analysis of social media to analyze themes relatingto the food system.It is common for political organizations to broadcast their interests and disseminate politicalinformation via Twitter. For instance, the EU owns and operates several Twitter accounts that deal withboth general and specific themes. By observing online interactions with these accounts, it is possible toidentify popularity levels relating to the accounts’ communicated themes.The empirical exercise engaged in here will provide a general overview of the possible growinginterest in specific food themes during the COVID-19 outbreak, and if and how such themes—associatedwith select EU Twitter accounts—have demonstrated increased activity over this period. In particular,we will focus on the theme of food management, particularly with respect to the re-organization of thefood management system to guarantee savings, security and safety.3.2. Metric of Theme PopularityIn this subsection, we introduce our measure of theme popularity (p). Following Li et al. [20],we propose a measure of popularity based on the number of retweets. This measure may be considereda natural extension of the methodology proposed in Li et al. [20], which included a measure of tweetpopularity based on the number of retweets per tweet. In particular, the authors introduced thismeasure to investigate the interplay between popularity and multimedia content; that is, to understandthe public resonance and relevance of particular tweets. In our case, we extend the authors’ approachby considering the total number of retweets per tweet pertaining to a specific theme. In this way,we move from measuring single tweet popularity to measuring broader theme popularity, collectingdifferent messages on the same topic. However, we also consider individual tweets, in order to notoverlook tweets dealing with a specific theme that do not have a positive number of retweets.For example, let us consider a tweet vector at time t, twt, of variable length N. Each elementof twt is defined as twi,t and assumes a value of 1, indicating the presence of a tweet. Accordingly,N = 0 defines a null vector and indicates the absence of a tweet at period t. As a proxy of popularity,we consider the number of retweets per post, rtwi,t. The number of retweets measures the increase(decrease) in popularity of a given tweet; hence, it is computed in addition to the presence of the tweet.In this way, the popularity of theme j at time t (pj,t) is represented by:p j,t =N∑itwi j,t(1 + rtwi j,t)(1)Using this formula, it is possible to jointly identify (i) the presence of tweets on a given themej and (ii) the popularity of that theme. We may also observe the distribution of retweets per tweet,in order to analyze whether the dynamics of the virus might have affected the popularity of the themeat hand. In the following section, we provide an overview of the main descriptive statistics.3.3. Social Media Attention during COVID-19COVID-19 has attracted the attention of various advocacy groups, as well as media and politicalactors. Undoubtedly, the crisis is unprecedented, costing millions of lives and testing the social,health and economic systems of many countries. During this crisis, many fears have arisen, largely dueto interruptions in the global supply chain. Among these, food shortages have been highly debated,as demonstrated by Laborde et al. in 2020 [21] suggesting the need to rethink global food supply chains.The topic has also been covered by various websites, which have discussed opportunities to create anenvironmentally friendly post-pandemic world, often framing the discourse in the perspective of thetransition to a circular economy.16Sustainability 2020, 12, 7939In this section, we employ Kaggle data (https://www.kaggle.com/smid80/coronavirus-covid19-tweets), comprised of tweets posted between 9 March and 30 April 2020. Drawing on the themepopularity metric (p) introduced above, Figure 1 shows the growing interest in the topic of foodsecurity, as evidenced in Twitter hashtags as the virus spread. Hashtags allow users to apply dynamic,user-generated tagging that helps other users easily find messages relating to a specific theme.Data on worldwide daily COVID-19 cases were sourced by the European Center of Disease Preventionand Control.                                 ‐ ‐                                                                                             ‐                                    ‐                                                ‐                ‐                                                                                                                                    