Tax Law Enforcement During Covid-19 for Indonesia's Economic Resilience

INCLAR3rd International Conference on Law Reform (3rd INCLAR)Volume 2022Conference PaperTax Law Enforcement During Covid-19 forIndonesia's Economic ResilienceNur Amalina Putri Adytia1, Surya Anoraga2*, Ilham Dwi Rafiqi21Master of Notary, Brawijaya University, Malang, Indonesia2Faculty of Law, University of Muhammadiyah Malang, Malang, IndonesiaORCIDNur Amalina Putri Adytia: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9084-970XAbstract.The Covid-19 pandemic has had a broad impact on the life of the nation and state,one of which is the economy. However, during the pandemic, many taxpayers foundit difficult to pay taxes properly as it had slowed down the circulation of the economyin society. In fact, many residents lost their livelihoods due to the Covid-19 pandemic.The impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the economic sector has made many peopleunable to pay properly. In such conditions, an appropriate solution is needed. Thispaper attempts to examine the application of tax law during the Covid-19 pandemicfor Indonesia’s economic resilience, and how to expand the tax base in the midst ofthe Covid-19 pandemic by relying on the juridical provisions of tax law. A strategicstep that can be taken is to enforce the tax law, one of which is to expand the taxbase. Enforcement of tax law will increase taxpayers voluntary compliance, encourageease of investment, and improve supervision of law enforcement systems that providecertainty, fairness, and benefit.Keywords: tax law, covid-19, tax base1. INTRODUCTIONThe outbreak of the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (Covid-19) outbreak is a national disasterthat affects the stability of the national economy and the productivity of the Indonesianpeople at large. The Covid-19 pandemic has an impact on every aspect of life, whethersocial, cultural, religious, political, or economic, both in Indonesia and abroad. Allcountries in the world are affected by the Covid-19 pandemic, so the government ispaying attention to various sectors to be able to suppress the turmoil in society over theimpact of this outbreak. In the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic, paying taxes basicallystill has to be done by all citizens who are taxpayers. However, during the Covid-19pandemic, many taxpayers found it difficult to pay taxes properly[1].One of the pillars of national economic resilience is the tax revenue sector. Therapidly growing and dynamic role of society must be utilized in the context of improvingHow to cite this article: Nur Amalina Putri Adytia, Surya Anoraga*, Ilham Dwi Rafiqi, (2022), “Tax Law Enforcement During Covid-19 for Indonesia’sEconomic Resilience” in 3rd International Conference on Law Reform (3rd INCLAR), KnE Social Sciences, pages 459–467. DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12117 Page 459Corresponding Author: SuryaAnoraga email:suryaanoragaumm@gmail.comPublished: 4 October 2022Publishing services provided byKnowledge EAdytia et al. This article isdistributed under the terms ofthe Creative CommonsAttribution License, whichpermits unrestricted use andredistribution provided that theoriginal author and source arecredited.Selection and Peer-review underthe responsibility of the INCLARConference Committee.INCLARlegal development and national economic resilience. The dynamics of the community’srole, including as taxpayers, have an important role as a form of participation in nationaldevelopment. Tax collection is not only an obligation but also an inherent right.Tax revenues are used for national development as well as strengthening nationaleconomic resilience carried out by the central government and local governments.Sources of funding received by the state must be managed with high discretion andallocated for the welfare of the people[2].Tax revenue fell due to the weakening economic crisis, and tax-intensive support fromlower income tax rates. Non-tax state revenues also decreased due to falling commodityprices. The COVID-19 pandemic has threatened the financial system as indicated by thedecline in various domestic activities. From the expenditure side, the impact caused byCovid-19 is very large. Overcoming the problems that arise due to Covid-19, it is hopedthat overcoming problems that arise due to Covid-19 is expected not to put too muchpressure on the state budget deficit. Therefore, we need a way that can help regulatethe current economy. And from fiscal policy in the form of tax instruments, turns out tohave a very large role[3].Economic conditions that tend to weaken due to the outbreak of the Covid-19 pan-demic will of course have an impact on tax revenues. Fiscal relaxation in the formof administrative relief and tax burdens that the government has begun to disburseto anticipate the economic weakness of the Covid-19 pandemic will further erode taxrevenues. In fact, optimal tax performance is still needed in the midst of the needfor various relaxations. Because, in the author’s opinion, the loss of tax revenue dueto various tax breaks to affected communities also needs to be balanced with theawareness of taxpayers.The public’s awareness of paying taxes has become even more crucial in the midstof the large funding needs from the government. In the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic,improvements in revenue performance are still needed with the increasing need for thegovernment’s role through subsidies or direct spending in overcoming the impact ofCovid-19. Certain sources of tax revenue need to be optimized and the redistribution ofthe tax burden needs to be carried out carefully so that relaxation is properly targeted.The government’s steps that have been given so far cannot be said to be final. Aslong as the Covid-19 pandemic has not yet reached its peak, it is not impossible that theresponse to tax instruments will continue to grow and be dynamic. Almost all of the taxrelaxations given are temporary, namely during the pandemic emergency status. Thevarious responses to tax instruments provided will end in stages if the impact of theDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12117 Page 460INCLARCovid-19 pandemic begins to decline. This means that an extension of the relaxationperiod will remain a possibility as long as the impact is still prolonged.In the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic situation, it is absolutely necessary to distributethe tax burden through a well-targeted strategy. This is not only aimed at maintainingtax revenues, but also to redistribute the tax burden more equitably according to theability to pay. Expansion of the tax base is the right approach because of the minimaltax base in Indonesia. If we examine carefully the facts that appear in the field, it willappear that the minimal tax base can actually be seen from four indicators.Therefore, in response to the various problems mentioned above, one of the urgentsteps that must be taken immediately is the expansion of the tax base. However,the question is, how to expand the tax base in the midst of the current situation ofthe Covid-19 pandemic, this question is very important to be answered correctly andcomprehensively. This is because, when the economic contribution to taxes declines,the distribution of the tax burden through targeted strategies is increasingly neededand is increasingly urgent to be carried out. The next question is how to implementthe right targeted tax laws in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic to strengthen theresilience of the Indonesian economy as a whole.In this paper, we offer solutions that are academic and applicable in tax law enforce-ment to strengthen Indonesia’s economic resilience in the midst of the Covid-19 pan-demic. To find a way to comprehensively expand the tax base and not conflict with taxlaws and other legal provisions in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic.2. METHODOLOGY/ MATERIALSThe method used in this research is a normative research method. normative legalresearch is research conducted by examining positive legislation using library materialsor secondary data. The approach method used in this research is the legal approachand the conceptual approach. The main/primary legal materials used are statutoryregulations. To assist the research, secondary legal materials are also used whichconsist of supporting literature such as books, research reports, journals, and the like[4].3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONSThe Covid-19 pandemic has resulted in a slowdown in the economy, even reachingminus numbers. Taxes play an important role in building the economic order of a country.In Indonesia, economic activity cannot be separated from the function of taxes as aDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12117 Page 461INCLARsource of state financing. Taxes play an important role in building the economic orderof a country. In Indonesia, economic activity cannot be separated from the function oftaxes as a source of state financing[5].  Figure 1: Economic and World Growth Indonesia in 2014-2019. Source: World Bank and Central StatisticsAgency, 2020.The spread of Corona Virus Disease 2019 (Covid-19) shows an increase from timeto time and causes increasing casualties and material losses in almost all countries inthe world, thus making the World Health Organization (WHO) declare it a pandemic onMarch 11, 2020. Pandemic Covid-19 causes various implications and impacts, not only onthe health aspect but also on the economic and financial aspects of almost all countriesin the world, including Indonesia. World economic growth in 2014-2019 ranged from2.4-3.19 percent (World Bank, 2020), while Indonesia’s economic growth ranged from4.88-5.17 percent (Central Bureau of Statistics, 2020) (Picture 1). Meanwhile, in 2020global economic growth is expected to decline from 3 percent to only 1.5 percent oreven lower, while Indonesia’s economic growth is estimated to only reach 4 percent orlower, depending on the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on people’s activities. andeconomic activity[6].As a source of state revenue, taxes have three functions, namely as a source ofgovernment revenue that can be used to finance development activities[7], in this case,taxes have a budgetary function. Taxes also play a role in regulating resource allocation,income distribution, and consumption, known as the tax regulation function. In addition,taxes also serve as economic stability. From the tax functions as an instrument of fiscalpolicy as mentioned above, in general, tax policies carried out by the government arealways directed to fulfill these three functions simultaneously[8].DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12117 Page 462INCLARTaxes in the implementation of development activities have a very strategic function.Taxes are not only a source of state finance used for public investment but the taxfunction can also be used to control state policy which is more commonly known as thebudgetary function and the regular end function. This is where actually taxes also havea role in the correlation between the government as a public servant and the communityas a supporter of the implementation of state development[8].According to Mardiasmo, there are two tax functions, namely the budget function(budgetary) and the regulating function (regular). Taxes function as a source of fundsfor the government to finance expenditures in the administration of state life. Taxesalso function as a tool to regulate or implement government policies in the social andeconomic fields. Taxes can be used by the government to regulate its people in orderto achieve certain goals[9].The law in this discussion is a law that was deliberately formed by the state, not alaw that occurs naturally in society, which is a crystallization of the association betweenhumans in society as a legal subject[10]. The Theory is a very important existence inthe legal world because it is a basic concept that can answer a problem. The Theory isalso a tool that provides a summary of how to understand a problem in every field oflegal science[11].The government is a community entity in a country that is given the authority torun the government. Government implementation can only be carried out with severalsupporting elements, one of which is the availability of adequate funds. Because withoutfinancial support, all government programs[12] will not be able to be implemented andthat means the function of the government in a country is not running optimally. Thefunds obtained by the state are state revenues used to prepare the State Revenueand Expenditure Budget[13]. The budget is a description of the financing used forgovernment administration and development purposes[14].It is important for a legal academic to know a broad understanding of theory so thatthere are no mistakes in making scientific works that are legal goals, it requires a longprocess and is a technical or managerial problem. Because it is a series of activitiesstarting from planning, formulating, organizing, mobilizing, monitoring, and evaluating.The role of the community in the formation of laws is a must in the decision-makingprocess regarding the substances regulated[15].All of the provisions in tax law also function as formal tax law so that the fulfillment ofrights and the implementation of tax obligations reflect legal certainty, legal justice[16],and benefits in accordance with the philosophy of the state of law (rechstaat) thatupholds the rule of law (supremacy of law)[17]. Thus, tax law enforcement will be able toDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12117 Page 463INCLARcreate a society that is aware, loyal, and obedient in carrying out their tax obligations(realization of regular functions). In turn, this will able to guarantee the achievement ofthe task of tax law in the context of state revenue in the field of taxation (realizationof the budgetary function) which runs regularly and continuously. Provisions in tax lawmust also be able to encourage ease of investment during the Covid-19 pandemic. If thisis realized, then in the end the provisions of the tax law will also be able to significantlyboost national economic growth[18].Tax law norms related to the provision of income tax incentives have actually emergedas binding rules and it is only a matter of implementing them. The Regulation of theMinister of Finance of the Republic of Indonesia Number 23/PMK.03/2020 concerningTax Incentives for Taxpayers Affected by the Corona Virus Outbreak contains normsthat regulate the provision of Income Tax Incentives. Article 2 Regulation of the Ministerof Finance of the Republic of Indonesia Number 23/PMK.03/2020 concerning TaxIncentives for Taxpayers Affected by the Corona Virus Outbreak.If the tax law norms in Article 2 of the Regulation of the Minister of Finance ofthe Republic of Indonesia Number 23/PMK.03/2020 concerning Tax Incentives forTaxpayers Affected by the Corona Virus Outbreak related to the provision of the above-mentioned PPh Incentives are truly applied consistently, then the norms are true willactually be able to expand the tax base. This is because the tax law norms in Article 2of the regulation of the Minister of Finance will either directly or indirectly prevent thestate and nation from being dependent on taxes from certain layers of taxpayers.However, it should be noted that the tax law norms in Article 2 of the regulation of theMinister of Finance must be implemented consistently. Consistency in tax law enforce-ment is a way for taxpayers to comply with tax law provisions. With the consistency in taxlaw enforcement, particularly related to the provision of income tax incentives, taxpayercompliance will increase. Otherwise, it is not impossible that taxpayer compliance willactually decrease.In addition to providing income tax incentives, relaxation of tax administration duringthe Covid-19 pandemic, or even after the Covid-19 pandemic, must also be given bythe government as a response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The legal norms that formthe basis for providing relaxation of tax administration have actually been born, namelyCircular Letter Number SE-13/PJ/2020 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation ofDuties During the Prevention of the Spread of Corona Virus Disease 2019 (Covid-19) inthe Directorate General of Taxes.However, what should be noted is that the granting of relaxation of tax administrationis actually the basic spirit of the implementation of tax law. In other words, the grantingDOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12117 Page 464INCLARof relaxation of tax administration is actually not only devoted to the Covid-19 pandemic,but also at any time and in any circumstances so that tax administration can be imposedsuch as late payment sanctions, submission of individual personal income tax returns,provisions for the time limit for applying for legal remedies, provisions for - provisions fortax amnesty participants, and so on, are not deemed to be burdensome to the taxpayer.Thus, referring to the provisions of the applicable tax law in Indonesia, the spiritof providing administrative convenience to taxpayers is actually not only given in anemergency situation such as the current Covid-19 pandemic. However, the spirit ofproviding administrative convenience to taxpayers is carried out in every situation andcondition. The provision of tax administration facilities will indirectly improve the qualityof tax morals to build tax compliance in the wider community.The importance of the tax revenue paradigm is influenced by the substance ofthe regulation and implementation of laws regarding regional governments and theirsynergy with the central government. In the end, it has an impact on national taxrevenue which helps to increase the resilience and stability of the national economy.The government must be careful in making adjustments and changes to tax policiesthat take into account the conditions of the democratic climate, economy, globalization,and regional autonomy itself, especially during the Covid-19 pandemic.Tax compliance must be carried out according to the awareness of each taxpayer inaccordance with the provisions of the tax law and regulations. This effort is carried outas a concrete manifestation of the government in optimizing state revenues, especiallyin the taxation sector. During this pandemic period, researchers tried to examine theissue of factors that affect taxpayer compliance such as providing tax incentives, taxrates, sanctions tax, and service tax[19].4. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONIn closing this paper, the conclusion that can be drawn from the long discussion in thispaper related to tax law enforcement to strengthen Indonesia’s economic resiliencein the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic is that taxes remain an obligation that mustbe fulfilled by every citizen who is a taxpayer. The Covid-19 pandemic has indeedparalyzed the economy, but tax obligations must still be carried out and fulfilled. In suchconditions, of course, people will find it difficult to pay taxes. Therefore, the governmentissued several legal policies to provide relief to the public regarding tax payments. Inaddition, responding to various problems experienced by taxation during the Covid-19DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12117 Page 465INCLARpandemic, the way to be taken is to enforce tax laws in order to strengthen economicresilience in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic.References[1] Amalina Putri Adytia YA, Dwi Rafiqi I. “Fulfillment of the Right to Food During theCovid-19 Pandemic in Indonesia,” in 2nd International Conference on Law Reform(INCLAR 2021), 2021, pp. 63–68.[2] Syukur M. Intensif Pajak terhadap Sumbangan Covid-19 dari perspektif Relasi Hukumpajak Indonesia dengan Hak Asasi Manusia. J. Suara Huk. 2020;2(2):34–8.[3] Aulawi A. “Penerbitan Peraturan Pemerintah Pengganti Undang-Undang Nomor 1Tahun 2020 sebagai Strategi Kebijakan Pajak pemerintah Indonesia dalam Meng-hadapi Dampak Pandemi Covid-19 terhadap Keuangan Negara,” Prog. J. pendidikan,Akunt. dan Keuang. 2020;3(2):11–15. https://doi.org/10.47080/progress.v3i2.936.[4] Ali Z. Metode Penelitian Hukum. Jakarta: Sinar Grafika; 2016.[5] Indahsari DN. “Pengaruh Kebijakan Insentif Pajak di Masa Pandemi Covid-19Terhadap Penerimaan PPN,” J. Pajak dan Keuang. Negara. 2021;3(1):54–8.[6] Warsito PL. “Potensi Penurunan Pajak dan Strategi Kebijakan Pajak untukMengantisipasi Dampak Pandemi Covid-19 Perspektif Ketahanan Nasional,” J. Ekon.dan Kebijak. Publik. 2020;11(2):22–3.[7] Anggraeny I. “LEGAL REVIEW OF SELLING LAND OF INHERITANCEWITHOUT APPROVAL OF ALL HEIRS,” Leg. J. Ilm. Huk., 2020.https://doi.org/10.22219/ljih.v28i1.11817.[8] Judisseno R. Pajak dan Strategi Bisnis. Jakarta: Gramedia Pustaka Utama; 1997.[9] Amardianto Arham AF. “Kebijakan Pajak Selama Pandemi Covid-19 di Kawasan AsiaTenggara,” J. Pajak dan Keuang. Negara. 2021;3(1):78–80.[10] Rafiqi ID. Pembaruan Politik Hukum Pembentukan Perundang-Undangan di BidangPengelolaan Sumber Daya Alam Perspektif Hukum Progresif. Bina Huk. Lingkung.2021;5(2):320–1.[11] Sumadi AF. Hukum dan Keadilan Sosial dalam perspektif hukum ketatanegaraan. J.Konstitusi. 2015;12(4):55.[12] Prakasa SU, Hariri A, Nuriyah I, Asis A, Salam I. Social aid of Covid-19 corruption:strategy and mitigation policy of Muhammadiyah East Java. Leg. J. Ilm. Huk. 2021Feb;29(1):27–45.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12117 Page 466INCLAR[13] Ratna D, Hapsari I, Aji A, Ilmiawan S, Samira E. Non-litigation as An EnvironmentalDispute Resolution Mechanism in Indonesia. Indones. Law Reform J. 2022Mar;2(1):55–66.[14] Mustaqiem, Pajak Daerah dalam Transisi Otonomi Daerah. Yogyakarta: FH UII Press;2008.[15] Yuliandri, Asas-Asas Pembentukan Peraturan perundang-undangan yang Baik:Gagasan Pembentukan Undang-Undang Berkelanjutan. Jakarta: Rajawali Pers;2010.[16] Widyawati A, Wijayanto I, Latifiani D, Ra’uf AS, Rosana AS, Widyawati A. Assistanceand Establishment of an Anti-Corruption Legal Clinic in Puguh Village, Boja District,Kendal Regency. J. Dedik. Huk. 2021 Aug;1(2):164–77.[17] Rafiqi ID. Criticisms toward the job creation bill and ethical reconstruction oflegislators based on prophetic values. Leg. J. Ilm. Huk. 2021;29(1):144–60.[18] M. F. S. Hukum Pajak di Indonesia: Suatu Pengantar Ilmu Hukum Terapan di Bidangperpajakan. Jakarta: Kencana; 2018.[19] N. Syanti Dewi, Widyasari, “Pengaruh Insentif Pajak, Tarif Pajak, Sanksi Pajak danPelayanan Pajak Terhadap Kepatuhan Wajib Pajak Selama Masa Pandemi Covid-19.”J. Ekon. dan Manajema. 2020;9(2):21–29.DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i15.12117 Page 467