Strengthening of Village Communities in Supporting National Economic Recovery

I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I    Journal of Governance  Volume 7 Issue 2, June 2022 (380-389) (P-ISSN 2528-276X) (E-ISSN 2598-6465)  http://dx.doi.org/10.31506/jog.v7i2.15389  380 Strengthening of Village Communities in Supporting National Economic Recovery  Rosidah Research and Development Agency, Indonesian Ministry of Home Affairs  Correspondence Email: rosidah1129@gmail.com   Received: January 9 2022; Revised: April 18 2022; Accepted: May 30 2022   Abstract: The national economic crisis faced by the central and regional governments faces considerable challenges in maintaining economic stability due to economic uncertainty that has an impact on economic activity. The purpose of this research is to strengthen the economies of rural communities in the long term by realizing the welfare of rural communities continues to increase through improving the economies of rural communities by fostering business actors by managing village potential. This study uses a qualitative approach to describe social phenomena that occur in rural communities as it seeks to strengthen the village economy. The type of research resulting from the selected qualitative method is descriptive research. These findings on strengthening social capital through community participation need support from local values. Keywords: Revitalization, Village Communities, Economic Recovery   Introduction  Economic growth is a target to be achieved in the long and short term as well as a way to measure the achievement of economic development in a country (Maheasy, 2018). The problem is, Indonesia's economic growth is projected to be more challenging in 2019 as global economic uncertainty remains (Ginting, 2019; Nugroho & Ruhama, 2021), coupled with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that has crippled most of the economy in Indonesia, as shown by data from the Central Statistics Agency (BPS). It was recorded that the economic growth rate in the first quarter (January-March) of 2020 only grew by 2.97%. This figure slowed from 4.97% in the fourth quarter of 2019. In fact, growth was far below the achievement of the first quarter of 2019, which reached 5.07%, and in the second quarter of 2020, Indonesia's economic growth rate was minus 5.32%. This figure is inversely proportional to the second quarter of 2019 of 5.05% (Wuryandani, 2020).  The increase in the number of urban poor is in line with the decline in users of accommodation and transportation services since February. Thus, urban areas are directly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, while rural areas are the next transmission (Suchaini, 2020). This transmission makes villages in Indonesia less than optimal in carrying out economic activities because of the new burden for villages from regulations due to the pandemic. On the other hand, the rural economy slowed down due to the realization of transfers to regions and village funds (TKDD) until March 2020, when it reached Rp174.50 trillion, which includes transfers to regions (TKD) of Rp167.30 trillion and village funds of Rp7.20 trillion. The realization of TKDD until March 2020 was around Rp. 16.82 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Rosidah, Strengthening of Village Communities in Supporting National Economic Recovery     381 trillion, or 8.79% (yoy) lower when compared to the same period in 2019 because the Central Government and Regional Governments were still focused on handling the impact of COVID-19 (Puspasari, 2020).  The wrong mindset from the perspective of the village community is interpreted by the dependence on the central government, which presents village funds as a foundation of hope in raising the potential of the village. This difference in view shows that the allocation of village funds given to villages in the country is expected to be a stimulant fund and not a dependency fund from these villages (Purnamasari, 2019), as well as the extreme dependence of the community on the government (Fatem, 2011). Based on the village development status reports in 2018 and 2019, the level of village independence continues to increase, especially in improving the status of developing villages, which is shown in table 1 below. Table 1. Comparison of Building Village Index (IDM) Data for 2018 –2019 Village Status Years 2018 2019 Very Lagging 8.978 6.644 Left Behind 27.436 20.358 Develop 30.440 38.460 Proceed 4.799 8.645 Independent 301 845 Not Recorded Yet  2 Total 71.952 74.954   The table above shows an increase in the status of village development in 2018 and 2019, especially with regard to efforts to create independent villages. In 2018 there were 301 independent villages, which increased in 2019 to 845 (35.61%). However, the creation of independent villages has not shown a significant increase when viewed from the total status of villages, which amounted to 74,954 in 2019. The comparison of independent villages in 2019 was only 1.13%, while based on the National Medium Term Development Plan (RPJMN) 2020–2024, the target for independent villages is at least a number of 8,559 independent villages by 2024. An independent and competitive village is an important issue and a concern for all elements of society. In order to realize an independent and competitive village, the government needs to study and map the economic potential of the village as a local resource by identifying the economic potential of the agricultural, plantation, livestock, tourism, and home and small industries (Wibowo & Alfarisy, 2020). For this reason, the development target of village status, which is the government's nawacita in creating independent villages, is a work priority for the current government. Strengthening the economy of rural communities is a priority step in supporting the creation of independent villages, which ultimately supports the recovery of the national economy. Until now, there has been no certainty in supporting the sustainable development of villages in Indonesia. In the rural context, sustainable development is related to poverty alleviation, without hunger, healthy and prosperous lives, quality education, gender equality, and decent work and economic growth. (Akca, Sayili, & Yilmazcoban, 2007). I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Journal of Governance Volume 7, Issue 2, June 2022  382 Revitalization means making something or an action vital. While the word vital has the meaning of very important or very necessary (for life and so on), through understanding through other languages, revitalization can mean processes, methods, and or actions to revive or reactivate various program activities (Hermawan & Rustiana, 2019). To strengthen the economy, Laretna explained that in the implementation of revitalization, community involvement is needed. The involvement in question is not just participating to support aspects of formality that require community participation; besides that, the community involved is not only the community in the environment, but the community in a broad sense (Putera, Afifuddin, & Widodo, 2020). In the context of simple problems, the people's economy is a "survival" strategy developed by poor people, both in cities and villages (Mubyarto, 1996). This shows that the village community's economy is an activity of rural communities in meeting their needs by using the potential of village resources, such as economic activities in the fields of agriculture, animal husbandry, and fishing. Strengthening economic independence by empowering village potential has been carried out by the government and even previous research has provided an overview of the importance of empowering village potential in supporting development progress in the village. Village potential is the power, strength, ability, and ability possessed by a village that has the possibility of being developed in order to improve the welfare of the community. Broadly speaking, village potential can be divided into two; the first is physical potential in the form of land, water, climate, geographical environment, livestock, and human resources. The second is the non-physical potential in the form of the community with its patterns and interactions, social institutions, educational institutions, and village social organizations, as well as village officials and civil servants (Soleh, 2017). The concept of social capital in development issues is considered a useful theoretical framework in the paradigm of sustainable inclusive development, which in the social dimension integrates three dimensions: social, economic, and environmental. In addition, the position of social capital also plays a positive role in the political dimension because it encourages participation, accessibility, and community freedom, which is also a principle in the sustainable, inclusive development paradigm (Rusy & Fathy, 2019). This approach shows that in supporting the strengthening of the economic independence of rural communities by maximizing village funds, there is community participation to build independent villages because the most important thing that can be applied in the management of village funds by involving the community is the need to carry out activities with a self-managed pattern, using local labor and utilizing materials. local standards in the village. With the self-management pattern, it means that the village is trying to plan and implement these activities independently so that the money used for the development will not flow out of the village. It is hoped that the implementation of these activities can absorb labor and provide income for those who work. Meanwhile, the use of local raw materials is expected to provide income to the people who have these raw materials (Indrawati, 2017). The study was compiled on strengthening the economies of rural communities in support of national economic recovery through three study concept approaches, which became issues concerning villages in the creation of independent villages. throughout Indonesia in the perspective of (1) I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Rosidah, Strengthening of Village Communities in Supporting National Economic Recovery     383 revitalizing the strengthening of village independence, (2) revitalizing the strengthening of social capital, and (3) revitalizing the strengthening of sustainable development in villages, as well as being discussed in an effort to increase the economic strengthening of rural communities.  Method This study uses a qualitative approach. Creswell (2016) defines qualitative research as "the exploration and understanding of meaning in a number of individuals or groups of people arising from social problems." The reason for choosing the qualitative method is that it can describe social phenomena that occur in rural communities while seeking to strengthen the village economy. This type of research from the selected qualitative method is a descriptive type of research. Descriptive qualitative research is a research method based on the philosophy of postpositivism, which is usually used to examine natural objective conditions where the researcher acts as a key instrument (Sugiyono, 2013). Descriptive research is used to describe the revitalization and economic strengthening of rural communities in support of the national economic recovery.  Results and Discussion The revitalization of the economic strengthening of rural communities is an effort to improve the economy by using methods, planned processes, and economic results by using the potential of village resources by involving the community as the main actor in supporting the strengthening of economic independence through 1) revitalizing strengthening village independence; (2) revitalizing capital-strengthening social activities; and (3) revitalizing the strengthening of sustainable development in the village, as well as being a discussion in an effort to increase the economic strengthening of rural communities.  Revitalization of Village Self-Reinforcement Revitalizing the strengthening of village independence by optimizing the position of the village as a community-based government by updating the economic structure in accordance with the aspirations of the local community and even creating economic empowerment that has competitive value. In addition, the revitalization of village potential plays a very supportive role in the recovery of the national economy. The vitality of potential village sectors, especially in agriculture and animal husbandry, is currently being degraded due to the leveling off of production in several food, horticulture, and livestock commodities. The deceleration of production capacity in the village has resulted in a decrease in national food security, resulting in the emergence of government policies to import food and livestock commodities that meet the needs of the Indonesian people. On the bright side, government policies on the allocation of village funds continue to increase every year (village funds in 2019 amounted to 70 trillion for 74,954 villages) and regulations that encourage villages to be independent, both economically and in governance. This is shown by the contribution of village funds to supporting the economy based on the 2019 PPMD Directorate General Performance Report shown in the graph below:     I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Journal of Governance Volume 7, Issue 2, June 2022  384 Graph 1. Impact of Using Village Funds on the Economy  Source: (Direktorat Jenderal Pembangunan dan Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Desa, 2020)   The graph above shows that village funds have an impact on the national economy of 0.49% of GDP and an increase in village sectoral productivity of 1.62%. However, this increase does not necessarily support the national economy due to a slowdown in the rate of economic growth in the second quarter of 2020, Indonesia's economic growth rate was minus 5.32%. This figure is inversely proportional to the second quarter of 2019 of 5.05%. Another urgency is the readiness of the village government as a change agency that can manage village potential into economic value. For this reason, Gilley (Gerwing, 2016) explains that change agents must be investigative and analytical to solve problems, know the problem solving process, and must be able to generate and assess alternatives and then understand and analyze complex problems. The complex problems faced by the change agency in revitalizing the strengthening of the village community's economy not only require an integrated concept from several ministries because it is directly related to community welfare and food security stability is maintained because it is related to basic needs. The role of change agencies can conceptualize change as a discontinuity or continuous process, especially expressing the way they consider the particular relationship between experience and time (Cerf, Olry, & Guillot, 2011).   The Revitalization of Strengthening Social Capital  The revitalization of the strengthening of social capital, which is currently decreasing community participation, is due to the fading of religious values, local norms, and customs. The participation of rural communities in strengthening the economy of rural communities can be in the form of creative ideas and energy. This view shows that in mobilizing the potential of the village, the community can ideally apply the principles of cooperation and mutual cooperation with various forms of participation. However, the power of mutual cooperation, which is gradually decreasing due to the various interests of various groups that intervene in democratic political activities, village government, and business activities of rural communities, also exacerbates the formation of village independence, which puts forward the values of mutual cooperation of rural communities to participate in solving problems that arise. faced in the village. Cornwall, A. (Hassan, Ong'ayo, & Osore, 2018) describes community participation as an important component for sustainable development and has been accepted across the I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Rosidah, Strengthening of Village Communities in Supporting National Economic Recovery     385 spectrum of development actors as a way to enhance development activities. The basic concept of community participation is that when disadvantaged communities participate in policies and programs that affect them, development is more likely to be sustainable (Oino, Towett, Kirui, & Luvega, 2015). Social capital consists of social relationships (cooperative behavior, loyalty, wisdom, and local knowledge), social institutions (associations, networks, and social leadership), and effective values or norms (tolerance, sympathy, trust, and honesty) that can be used appropriately to give birth to a social contract, social responsibility, independence, and participation (Theresia, Andini, Nugraha, and Mardikanto, 2014).Social capital refers to the main aspects of social organization, such as local beliefs, norms, and customs, that can increase the economic strength of rural communities through coordinated actions. The main elements of social capital include: (1) mutual trust, (2) honesty, (3) institutions that include shared values, norms, and sanctions. These elements, in their dynamics, must be created and transmitted through socio-cultural mechanisms within a social unit such as family, community, voluntary association, state, and so on (Anggraini & Agus, 2018). Therefore, the participation of rural communities in supporting the strengthening of the community's economy is an important factor to ensure that the economic strengthening program can be implemented through economic activities and in the utilization of human and natural resources (Raharjo, 2013). Strengthening the economy of rural communities with the support of participatory economic democracy is more appropriate in supporting the strengthening of the village economy. Economic democracy is an economic activity carried out by the people, for the people, and as much as possible for the prosperity of the people (Syufa'at, 2014). Thus, the participatory placement of economic democracy is to move rural communities as subjects and objects of economic development and, at the same time, as one of the determinants of economic success because it departs from the goals and objectives of meeting community needs, which have become a collective agreement in shaping the direction of village economic development. Strengthening economic democracy activates the potential of villages to respect each other based on the rules of cultural values, norms, and tolerance, and to manage businesses together in mutual cooperation. For this reason, efforts to support village community business activities and at the same time raise village potential are based on Law Number 6 of 2014 concerning Villages, explaining that the efforts carried out by the community are supported by the existence of BUMdes institutions. The purpose of BUMdes is to improve the village economy and increase community efforts in managing village economic potential so that village potential can be utilized and utilized for sustainable development in order to improve the welfare of the village community itself. However, the fact that the problem with the establishment of BUMdes is only through a "project approach" is not based on local strengths and needs. BUMdes as an instrument to move the community's economy has not fully become an understanding among local economic activities and village people (Lumintang & Waani, 2020).   Revitalization Strengthens Sustainable Development Sustainable development in the village depends on the application of appropriate information and technology, which until now has not fully supported the economic strengthening of rural communities. The implementation of I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Journal of Governance Volume 7, Issue 2, June 2022  386 Village Sustainable Development has not been structured, and the concept of village development is planned in the short and long term. Appropriate information and technology in supporting rural community economic activities such as market development and marketing network development, its implementation is still not optimal. For this reason, revitalizing the strengthening of sustainable development in villages is an effort that needs to be carried out in a planned and integrated manner, not only in developing the right technology to support the economic activities of rural communities, but also in the use of technology can be used from time to time. This concept shows that the use of appropriate technology to support village management continues to develop following the sustainable development of the village economy. It denotes sustainable economic development as a program, policy, or activity designed to create or maintain jobs and wealth in a way that contributes to environmental, social, and economic well-being over time (Hammer & Pivo, 2017). The potential of the village is as a driver of the people's economy, which has the understanding that the growth and development of the village economy will be able to optimize the utilization of available local resources. This shows that the potential of the village should be prioritized on optimizing the use of local resources, both natural and existing potential. The achievement of the optimization development leads to the management of village potential as the basis for driving the people's economy in a synergistic system. Comprehensive development of villages and rural areas based on local potential is an important factor for regional development, poverty alleviation, and the reduction of regional disparities. (Pangestuti, Nuralam, Furqon, & Ramadhan, 2018). Revitalization of strengthening sustainable development in villages by designing village economic improvement programs must be able to take place continuously or sustainably in the short and long term. The preparation of a sustainable village community economic strengthening plan in improving the welfare of rural communities is not only a project activity, but the village community, as the driving force of the village economy, must create a village community  Conclusion The conclusions of the Revitalization of Economic Strengthening of Village Communities in Supporting National Economic Recovery are as follows: The weakness of village independence in supporting the national economy cannot be separated from the contribution of village funds that can be used in creating jobs and increasing village sectoral productivity; from the advantages of village independence and even the lack of creativity in utilizing village potential that is useful and efficient for the welfare of rural communities. The village government's lack of readiness as a change agent is capable of translating village potential into economic value. Strengthening social capital on community participation, which fades from local values, norms, and customs, which gradually decreases the power of mutual cooperation for the welfare of the village community. In addition, the strength of local institutions is less active in supporting the village economy because the weak access to control and benefits received by the community do not show any outcomes or impacts in strengthening the village community's economy. Sustainable development in the village depends on the application of appropriate information and technology, which until now has not fully supported the economic strengthening of rural I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Rosidah, Strengthening of Village Communities in Supporting National Economic Recovery     387 communities. In addition, the implementation of Village Sustainable Development has not been structured, and the concept of village development is planned in the short and long term.  Acknowledgment This study received a huge amount of support; therefore, the author would like to represent her deepest sincere gratitude to all those who made this research successful.  References Hammer, J., & Pivo, G. (2017). The Triple Bottom Line and Sustainable Economic Development Theory and Practice. Economic Development Quarterly, 31(1), 25-36. Maolani, D. Y. (2019). Strengthening Village and Village Government towards Sustainable Development in The Framework of Increasing Community Welfare. JISPO, 9(2). Akca, H., Sayili, M., & Yilmazcoban, M. (2007). Rural Awareness of Environmental Issues:. Polish J. of Environ. Stud., 16(2), 177-182. Anggraini, O., & Agus, M. (2018). Penguatan Modal Sosial Berbasis Kelembagaan Lokal. JSEP, 11(2), 11-24. Badan Penjamin Mutu Internal Sekretariat Presiden. (2020). Perkuat Ekonomi Desa di Tengah Pandemi. Retrieved Oktober 31, 2020, from https://www.presidenri.go.id/siaran-pers/perkuat-ekonomi-desa-di-tengah-pandemi/ Bhandari, H., & Yasunobu, K. (2009). What is Social Capital? A Comprehensive Review of the Concept. Asian Journal of Social Science, 37(3), 480-510. Cerf, M., Olry, P., & Guillot, M.-N. (2011). Acting as a Change Agent in SupportingSustainable Agriculture: How to Copewith New Professional Situations? Journal of Agricultural Education and Extension, 17(1), 7-19. Creswell, J. (2016). Research Design: Pendekatan Kualitatif, Kuantitatif, dan Mixed. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar. Direktorat Jenderal Pembangunan dan Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Desa. (2020). Laporan Kinerja Direktorat Jenderal PPMD Tahun 2019. Retrieved November 01, 2020, from https://kemendesa.go.id/berita/assets/files/LAPORAN_KINERJA_DITJEN_PPMD_2019.pdf Direktorat Jenderal Pembangunan Kawasan Perdesaan. (2020). 3 Poin Arahan Presiden dalam Percepatan Peningkatan Ekonomi Desa. Retrieved Oktober 31, 2020, from https://ditjenpkp.kemendesa.go.id/index.php/view/detil/251/3-poin-arahan-presiden-dalam-percepatan-peningkatan-ekonomi-desa Fatem, A. (2011). Policies in Village Development: Learning from Community Empowerment and Participation in Jayapura. International Journal of Administrative Science & Organization, 18(2), 108-121. Gerwing, C. (2016). Meaning of Change Agents withinOrganizational Change. Journal of Applied Leadership and Management, 4, 21-40. Ginting, A. M. (2019). Tantangan dan Prospek Perekonomian Indonesia Tahun 2019 di Tengah Perlambatan Pertumbuhan Ekonomi Global. Kajian Singkat terhadap Isu Aktual dan Strategis, XI(2), pp. 19-24. Hassan, F., Ong’ayo, H., & Osore, M. (2018). Measuring the Level of Community Participation in a Demand Driven Development Project: Case of Hazina Ya Maendeleo Ya PwaniApproach in I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Journal of Governance Volume 7, Issue 2, June 2022  388 Coastal Kenya. Open Journal of Social Sciences, 6, 189-203. Hermawan, Y., & Rustiana, E. (2019). Productivity Improvement Through Group Cohesiveness and Conditions Revitalization. Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi (JIA), XVI(1), 51-65. Indrawati, S. M. (2017). Buku Pintar Dana Desa. Jakarta: Direktorat Jenderal Perimbangan Keuangan. Kementerian Desa, Pembangunan Daerah Tertinggal dan Transmigrasi. (2019). Rencana Strategis Kementerian Desa, Pembangunan Daerah Tertinggal dan Transmigrasi 2020 -2024. Retrieved November 01, 2020, from https://www.kemendesa.go.id/berita/assets/files/RANCANGAN_RENSTRA_2020-2024.pdf Lumintang, J., & Waani, F. J. (2020). Peningkatan Kapasitas Pengelolaan Badan Usaha Milik Desa (BUMdes) di Desa Koka dan Desa Kembes 2 Kecamatan Tombulu. The Studies of Social Science, 2(1), 15-21. Mahmudah, R. (2018). The Effect of Education to Indonesian Economic Growth. International Journal of Educational Research Review, 4(2), 140-145. Mubyarto. (1996). Ekonomi Rakyat dan Program IDT. Yogyakarta: Adtya Media. Nugroho, H., & Ruhama, Z. (2021). Kebijakan Perlindungan Sosial Indonesia pada Situasi Krisis Corona Virus Disease 2019. Salus Cultura: Jurnal Pembangunan Manusia dan Kebudayaan, 1(1), 61-70. Oino, P. G., Towett, G., Kirui, K., & Luvega, C. (2015). The Dilemma in Sustainability of Community-Based Projects in Kenya. Global Journal of Advanced Research, 2(4), 757-768. Pangestuti, E., Nuralam, I. P., Furqon, M. T., & Ramadhan, H. M. (2018). Peta Potensi dalam Menciptakan Kemandirian Ekonomi Desa (Studi pada Desa Tawang Argo, Kabupaten Malang). Journal of Applied Business Administration, 2(2), 258-266. Purnamasari, D. M. (2019). Dana Desa Dinilai Harus Jadi Dana Stimulan, Bukan Ketergantungan. Retrieved November 01, 2020, from Kompas.com: https://nasional.kompas.com/read/2019/11/07/09230841/dana-desa-dinilai-harus-jadi-dana-stimulan-bukan-ketergantungan Puspasari, R. (2020). Pemerintah Waspada Dampak Pandemi Covid-19 Terhadap Ekonomi Indonesia. Retrieved Oktober 31, 2020, from https://www.kemenkeu.go.id/media/14954/sp-27-pemerintah-waspada-dampak-pandemi-covid-19-terhadap-ekonomi-indonesia_v5a.pdf Putera, R. B., Afifuddin, & Widodo, R. P. (2020). Revitalisasi Sumberdaya Air Sungai Kalimalang sebagai Strategi Pemanfaatan Lahan di Kota Bekasi (Studi Kasus Kawasan Sungai Kalimalang, Kota Bekasi, Jawa Barat). Jurnal Respon Publik, 14(4), 89-96. Raharjo, A. (2013). Pembangunan Pedesaan; Pendekatan Partisipatif, Tipologi, Strategi, Konsep Desa Pusat Pertumbuhan. Yogyakarta: Graha Ilmu. Rusy, & Fathy. (2019). Modal Sosial: Konsep, Inklusivitas dan Pemberdayaan Masyarakat. Jurnal Pemikiran Sosiologi, 1-17. Satuan Tugas Penanganan Covid-19. (2020). Skema Pemberian Bantuan untuk Masyarakat Terdampak Pandemi COVID-19. Retrieved Oktober 31, 2020, from https://covid19.go.id/p/berita/skema-pemberian-bantuan-untuk-I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Rosidah, Strengthening of Village Communities in Supporting National Economic Recovery     389 masyarakat-terdampak-pandemi-covid-19 Soleh, A. (2017). Strategi Pengembangan Potensi Desa. Jurnal Sungkai, 5(1), 32-52. Suchaini, U. (2020). Pemulihan Ekonomi dari Desa. Retrieved Oktober 31, 2020, from https://news.detik.com/kolom/d-5101921/pemulihan-ekonomi-dari-desa Sugiyono. (2013). Metode Penelitian Pendidikan Pendekatan Kuantitatif, Kualitatif, dan R&D. Bandung: Alfabeta. Suliswati, D., & Razi, F. (2020). Kebijakan Pemerintah Desa Lowayu Kecamatan Dukun Kabupaten Gresik dalam Rekonstruksi Ekonomi Pasca Pandemi Covid-19. Prosiding Penelitian & Pengabdian Kepada Masyarakat, 7(9), 348-359. Sunarsi, D., Hidayat, D., Maddinsyah, A., Suryani, N. L., & Komarudin, K. (2021). Penyuluhan Wirausaha Untuk Meningkatkan Ekonomi Keluarga Dengan Daur Ulang Barang Bekas Desa Mekarsari Kabupaten Bogor. Jurnal PADMA: Pengabdian Dharma Masyarakat, 1(2). Suparmoko, M. (2013). Pengantar Ekonomika Makro. Yogyakarta: BPFE. Syufa’at. (2014). Demokrasi Ekonomi di Indonesia Era Reformasi. el-JIZYA, II(1), 184-195. Theresia, A., Andini, K. S., Nugraha, P. G., & Mardikanto, T. (2014). Pembangunan Berbasis Masyarakat : Acuan Bagi Praktisi, Akademis, dan Pemerhati Pengembangan Masyarakat. Bandung: Alfabeta. Wibowo, A. A., & Alfarisy, M. F. (2020). Analisis Potensi Ekonomi Desa dan Prospek Pengembangannya. Jurnal Ekonomi, Bisnis dan Akuntansi (JEBA, 22(2), 204-219. Wuryandani, D. (2020). Dampak Pandemi Covid-19 Terhadap Pertumbuhan Ekonomi Indonesia 2020 dan Solusinya. Kajian Singkat terhadap Isu Aktual dan Strategis, XII(15), 19-24.  