Opportunities for a low pollution economic recovery in Brazil

Opportunities for a low pollution  
economic recovery in Brazil 
April 2017 
Executive Summary
With Brazil struggling to revive its stagnant economy, there are opportunities to do so in a low pollution manner. 
Taking the low pollution path out of recession will cost less, can potentially reap large economic benefits, and carries 
benefits for health, social welfare, indigenous people and the environment.
This briefing paper argues that the low pollution development pathway—which involves scaling up wind power, forest 
conservation policies, and modernising urban public transport networks—can act as an accelerator, rather than a 
brake, on economic growth and social inclusion in Brazil. 
Key findings:
The Government of Brazil is in the unique position to demonstrate to the world that it is possible for a country to 
recover from of an economic crisis by adopting low pollution policies. A low pollution economic recovery can be 
achieved by: 
1. Scaling up wind power capacity and other renewable sources of energy, rather than expanding thermal or large 
hydroelectric projects
2. Protecting forests and using land more efficiently, rather than expanding agricultural enterprises into rainforest 
and savannah regions
3. Modernising urban public transport networks, rather than expanding road systems, which will be quickly appro-
priated by automobiles, requiring more oil and ethanol.   
In sum, the rapid roll out of a policy program that allows low pollution infrastructure and enterprises to flourish 
may  help propel Brazil back into a position of economic  health; as well as deliver strong social (poverty alleviation), 
economic (job creation and wage growth), and environmental (reduced greenhouse gas [GHG] emissions) dividends 
for Brazil. This pathway will also help Brazil meet its Nationally Determined Commitment to the Paris Agreement to 
reduce GHG emissions by 37% below 2005 levels by 2025, which will help tackle global climate change.  
www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au
                                                                                                                       Briefing Paper 8
This paper is part of a series of briefing papers that examine the climate change policies of the countries key to the 
Paris Agreement and its effective and ongoing implementation.   
Ben Parr, Carlos Eduardo F.  Young and Don Henry
Introduction
The first decade of this century saw almost 40 million 
people in Brazil—one fifth of the entire Brazilian pop-
ulation—lifted out of poverty. This period of strong 
economic growth in Brazil also resulted in record low 
unemployment, rising wages and falling inequality. 
However, more recently, Brazil’s economy has wors-
ened. Economic growth has been replaced by the worst 
recession ever recorded in Brazil: from the first quarter 
of 2015 to the third quarter of 2016, there were seven 
consecutive quarters with negative rates of growth. The 
2016 gross domestic product (GDP) was smaller, in real 
terms, than the 2010 GDP, even though the population 
increased 5.4% in the same period. The Brazilian real has 
fallen 48% against the US dollar from May 2013 to Feb-
ruary 2017, a necessary shift, but one that adds to the 
burden of the R$1.2 billion ($US40 million) in foreign 
debt owed by Brazilian companies that falls due this year.  
Investment declined by more than 25% from 2013 to 
2016. There are yet no clear signals that this prolonged 
recession will be over in the short run. 
Unemployment has reached its worst record, at more 
than 12 million people (11.9% of the total). Inflation is 
slowly declining, but interest rates remain at extraordi-
nary high levels (around 12%), real incomes are contract-
ing, and Brazil’s prized investment grade credit rating has 
been degraded. 
To get the Brazilian economy back on track some 
economists have suggested an overhaul of the country’s 
outdated labour laws, a simplification of the taxation 
system, cutting red tape, and/or reducing protectionism. 
However, this typically Western neoliberal agenda sits 
uneasily with the bipartisan sense of social justice in the 
formation of Brazilian policy and politics.  
A more compatible option worthy of consideration is 
the low pollution development pathway. 
This pathway is premised on the notion that green pol-
icies—low carbon, resource efficient and environmen-
tally concerned—can act as an accelerator, rather than 
a brake, on economic growth and social inclusion (eg. 
investment, job creation, and wage growth). 
At times this logic has been adopted by Brazil’s leaders. 
In September 2014, at the UN Climate Summit in New 
York, the former President of Brazil, Dilma Rousseff, 
asserted that ‘we (the international community) must 
overcome the logic that preventing climate change 
negatively impacts the economy’.1 Policy initiatives soon 
followed; in June 2015, Brazil announced that they intend 
to increase the share of renewables—beyond hydro-
power—in their electricity generation mix to the level 
of 20% by 2030, and commit to a target of a zero illegal 
deforestation rate between now and 2030, all in an ef-
fort to avoid dangerous global climate change.2  
After the impeachment of Ms Rousseff in May 2016, 
the government of President Michel Temer has revived 
and reinforced the push towards unsustainable, brown 
economic activities, especially those intensive in carbon 
emissions. 
Nevertheless, the possibilities for a greener redirec-
tion of the economy remain in the many opportunities 
that still exist for low pollution investment, growth and 
jobs in Brazil. This briefing paper aims to highlight these 
opportunities in the electricity, land-use, and cities and 
urban transport sectors. We explore each in sequence.  
Scale up wind power capacity  
This section examines the electricity generation sector.  
We find that policies that assist to scale up wind power 
capacity have the potential to deliver more economic, 
social and environmental benefits than policies that pro-
mote large-scale dam building.
Brief policy history 
Brazil’s large scale hydroelectricity plants were mostly 
built between 1968 and 1984.3  The justification for this 
development path was that Brazil had very limited coal 
reserves, and that in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis, 
national energy security had become a top priority. The 
military were uninterested in the environmental and 
social costs of hydropower, and as such, large swathes 
of native vegetation and many villages succumbed to the 
rising waters—displacing indigenous people—brought 
on by the construction of several mega dams.
However, as global concern about the environment grew 
in the late 1970s and 1980s, this approach to electrici-
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
2          www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au
ty generation was increasingly criticised. Furthermore, 
democratisation in Brazil in the mid-1980s led to 
non-state actors having a much greater influence over 
environmental policymaking, Brazil’s leading role at the 
1992 Earth Summit held in Rio de Janeiro was indicative 
of this increased influence.  
However, it wasn’t until a severe drought in 2001— 
which reduced water levels in several key reservoirs 
causing widespread blackouts—that Brazilian policy-
makers began to actively search for alternative ways of 
generating electricity.  
In 2002, the Program for Incentives for Alternative 
Energy in Electricity (Proinfa) was enacted. This alterna-
tive electricity program kick started Brazil’s renewable 
program. In its first stage, the program sought to pro-
mote the use of wind, biomass and small hydro through 
subsidies and incentives. In its second stage, the program 
mandated an increase in renewables’ share of annual 
energy consumption to 10% by 2020.4 
The Proinfa was regulated in 2004. Wind power boomed. 
From 2005 to 2011, installed wind capacity in Brazil 
grew from 30 megawatts to 1000 megawatts.5  At the 
same time, large scale hydroelectric capacity was also 
expanded.  Between 2007 and 2013, the Jirau and Santo 
Antonio hydroelectric plants were built on the Madera 
River, and construction began on the Belo Monte Dam 
on Xingu River. All were located within the Amazon 
region.  
At present, installed wind capacity in Brazil is project-
ed to increase to 16 400 megawatts by 2019.6  And as 
part of that goal, in June 2015, Brazil pledged under the 
Brazil-US agreement on climate change, that it would 
double the share of renewables—other than large scale 
hydropower—in its electricity generation mix to 20% by 
2030.7  
The Belo Monte Dam complex is due for completion 
in 2019, at which time it will be the third largest in 
the world. It began operations in April 2016, with less 
than 5% of its potential, but there is an ongoing judicial 
process against businessmen and government officials 
due to one of the largest bribery scandals in Brazilian 
history. Many of the owners and directors of the building 
companies and politicians are facing judicial prosecution 
because of that (some are already in jail). 
Advantages and disadvantages 
At present, job opportunities in the wind sector mainly 
exist in civil construction and the provision of income to 
local landholders that permit wind towers to be erected 
on their land. This is good news for the population living 
in the northeast of Brazil. Favourable geographical condi-
tions in this region, including an extensive shoreline and 
strong trade winds, provide the best conditions for wind 
power generation in the country. This region is Brazil’s 
poorest.
Brazil’s poorest are in desperate need of new skills to 
exit poverty permanently. Since 2003, Brazil has made 
impressive progress in reducing nationwide poverty. 
Between 2001 and 2013 poverty in Brazil fell from 24.7% 
to 8.9%.8  However, according to the World Bank, a lack 
of work ready skills is the main reason why more than 
one third of the Brazilian population remains in a con-
dition of economic vulnerability, that is, they are on the 
brink of falling back into poverty. Equipping this group 
with job ready skills for use in an industry with huge 
potential growth can help ensure this group escapes 
poverty permanently. 
High skilled jobs mainly exist in the production of 
equipment. These jobs are yet to be fully realised be-
cause about half of the wind components used in Brazil 
are imported. Establishing incentives and price signals 
to encourage research and development into national 
wind technology would generate high skilled jobs in the 
country. 
Wind energy is currently cost competitive—without 
subsidies—with hydroelectric and coal power. The 
production and investment cost per unit of electricity 
output for wind has been declining, and for the following 
reasons it is believed this decline will continue: 
1.  The wind industry is relatively young, particularly in 
Brazil. Therefore, technological breakthroughs, which re-
search and development programs in Brazil can contrib-
ute to, have the potential to further reduce costs.
2.  Adjustments to the turbine design can change the 
economic calculations. For example, the total potential 
for wind power generation in Brazil is officially estimated 
at 144 gigawatts, or 270 terawatt-hours/year (about half 
of the national current electricity consumption). 
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
  www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au              3 
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
4          www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au
However, these figures assume that the rotors only 
extend 50 meters above the ground, but if the rotors 
were positioned at 100 meters, the potential for power 
generation would exceed 300 gigawatts, more than the 
potential of hydro power.9  
3.  Brazil has a comparative advantage in the wind sector, 
compared with foreign countries, because it has experi-
ence in running a successful wind power expansion pro-
gram. The Proinfa scheme—which combined a mandated 
feed-in-tariff, a national content requirement, long-term 
contracts for power producers, auctions for licences 
to supply electricity to the national grid, and subsidised 
credit from the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES)—
successfully attracted private firms, from home and 
abroad, into the sector. Between 2008 and 2014, foreign 
wind component manufacturers operating in Brazil grew 
from one to four, accompanied by thirteen new tower 
manufacturers, seven turbine assemblers, and more than 
a dozen parts and components suppliers. 
In terms of the environmental advantages, ‘wind energy’, 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ex-
plains, ‘has significant potential to reduce (and is already 
reducing) GHG emissions’.10  The International Energy 
Agency forecasts that wind energy will play an increas-
ingly prominent role in Brazil’s future low pollution 
energy mix.
Hydroelectricity, by contrast, is becoming increasingly 
problematic. 
Brazil’s electricity supply is heavily reliant on hydroe-
lectricity. Hydropower constitutes 80% of Brazil’s total 
electricity built capacity. This level of dependency means 
that Brazil’s electricity supply is highly exposed to chang-
es in weather patterns, particularly drought. 
The older style dams, which comprise a single very large 
reservoir, and the new run-of-the-river design, which 
comprise smaller dams to avoid disturbance to natural 
river flows, suffer under drought conditions. The former 
loses capacity to generate electricity if its reservoir runs 
low. The latter loses capacity because it doesn’t have a 
reservoir (ie. storage capacity). Both methods are de-
pendent on seasonal variation in precipitation patterns 
and periods of drought, and in low rainfall periods, both 
designs need back-up power. 
Brazil is mostly using natural gas for back-up, along with 
fuel oil and coal fired power plants. Brazil’s domestic 
coal supply is very limited, so it has been importing nat-
ural gas, coal and electricity from abroad, which contra-
dicts the principal justification for creating dams in the 
first place, energy self-sufficiency. 
Some other problems associated with traditional hydro-
electric dams include the displacement of local commu-
nities and the disturbance of ecosystems, especially in 
the Amazon where most of the unexploited hydropower 
resides. In addition, flooding forests causes huge amounts 
of methane to be released, and the run-of-the-river de-
sign cannot be boosted during periods of high electricity 
demand such as during heatwaves, which can result in 
increased heat related stress and illness.
There is a strong case to be made for a hydro-wind 
integrated system in Brazil. Both hydro and wind energy 
have storage problems that could be overcome by wind 
providing electricity when the turbines are spinning, 
which results in water savings in large-hydro systems, 
that could then be switched-on when the wind stops 
blowing. This combination has the advantage of estab-
lishing a resilient, carbon dioxide (CO2) emission free, 
power generation system at competitive costs. Further, 
because of where the two power sources are located in 
Brazil, they also have seasonal compatibility, more wind 
when hydro is low and vice versa.
 
Hydropower and São Paulo’s drought 
The Metropolitan region in São Paulo, about 11 
million people, is heavily reliant on hydroelectric-
ity. It recently suffered through its worst drought 
in 80 years. Key reservoirs were at historic lows. 
This caused rolling power cuts, in some areas for 
days.  Utility companies were forced to import 
fossil fuel power from Argentina. Electricity prices 
spiked as distributors recouped losses. 
São Paulo is responsible for more than half of 
Brazil’s economic output, and serves as the financial 
centre for most of South America. Power outages, 
and the social instability this creates, deter  
commercial activity.
In summary, greater diversification away from hydroelec-
tricity is a good way of protecting Brazil’s poorer com-
munities, boosting business opportunities, and ensuring 
future energy security. 
Policy opportunities to help grow Brazil’s wind 
industry 
1.  Knowledge about the wind sector in Brazil remains 
relatively low in comparison to hydropower. Technologi-
cal and knowledge transfer from countries with a mature 
wind industry could assist its development in Brazil.
2.  The share of imported components remains relatively 
high. Brazil should seek to gain technological control 
over the wind power manufacturing process by way of 
establishing a national innovation scheme that focuses 
on developing national technology and high skilled jobs 
in the country.
3.  Expanding Brazil’s wind power capacity is dependent 
on the outcome of negotiations with companies, lobby-
ists and bureaucrats that support hydropower. To date, 
this network, which is deeply embedded in the policy-
making process in Brazil, has made it extremely difficult 
for wind power stakeholders to get an equal hearing. 
Strategies and support for this group may generate posi-
tive results for wind power expansion. 
4.  Other opportunities include deploying international 
finance to help upgrade Brazil’s outdated electricity supply 
infrastructure. Most of Brazil’s electricity is transmit-
ted through the National Interconnected System. But 
the lines are of inferior quality, poorly maintained, and 
do not have cheap electronic leak detectors.  Also, the 
lack of smart grids that allow electricity to be quickly 
redistributed inhibits the expansion of complementarity 
renewable sources. Electricity theft is also a problem. 
These initiatives could help Brazil increase its wind 
power capacity. According to the Brazilian Association 
of Wind Power, in February 2017, wind power capacity 
in Brazil was 10.79 gigawatts, equivalent to 7.1% of the 
electricity power capacity in the country.
Protect forests  
This section examines the land use sector. We find that 
policies that protect forests, for instance, by using already 
cleared land more efficiently, have the potential to deliver 
more economic, social and environmental gains than 
clearing more forests for agriculture. 
Brief policy history  
In the 1960s and 1970s, massive swathes of Amazon 
rainforest were bulldozed and burnt to make way for ag-
ricultural enterprises.  Based on fears that the Amazon—
largely void of communications and infrastructure—
posed a weak point in national defenses, the government 
offered a number of wide ranging incentives and subsi-
dies to attract agribusinesses, mostly cattle ranching and 
soybean farmers, and mining speculators, to the region.   
The so-called slash-and-burn policies of this era, at their 
peak, led to more than 31 000 km2 of forest–an area the 
size of Belgium—being destroyed each year.  
This style of agricultural rollout in the Amazon continued 
into the 1980s. Between 1978 and 1987, the total area 
deforested rose from 152 100 km2 to a massive 372 700 
km2, which is nearly 10% of the total area. Reports con-
firm that about 71% of total deforestation in the Amazon 
up to 1985 was due to agricultural expansion.11  
In the 1990s things got worse as a combination of high 
global food prices, and ironically, forest protection laws 
introduced in 1996—which were deemed virtually im-
possible to enforce or comply with—incentivised cattle 
ranching and soybean farming expansion.12 
It wasn’t until the 2000s that deforestation declined. A 
series of policy reforms, largely championed by Marina 
Silva (Brazil’s Minister for the Environment, 2003-2008), 
caused annual average deforestation to drop from of 
27 800 km2 per year in 2004 to 6400 km2 per year in 
2011.13  
Minister Silva argued that deforestation generated few 
economic benefits in comparison to the gains that could 
be made from protecting forests. She assembled a frac-
tious coalition of agribusiness, mining, energy utilities, and 
NGO leaders to back this argument.
Policy reforms and social changes in this period included:
• increased funding for policing and enforcement 
• expanded farming exclusion zones 
• increased public concern about climate change 
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
  www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au              5 
• product boycotts 
• a decline in soybean and meat prices 
• a rising Brazilian currency 
• improved cattle breeding techniques
• engagement with international climate mechanisms 
such as Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and 
Forest Degradation (REDD). 
In 2012 annual deforestation reached its lowest point 
at 4700 km2. In 2013 it increased to 5600 km2.  And in 
2014, it declined again to 4800 km2.14  Higher food pric-
es, highway improvement in the region, and a resurgent 
ruralista lobby, with the reduction of the governments 
capacity to fight deforestation, have contributed to the 
worsening results in recent years. 
But has this deforestation reduction been converted 
into reductions in GHG emissions? 
Figure 1 shows a steady decline in GHGs from mid-
2000s to about 2011-12, which parallels reduced annual 
deforestation rates in this period. But from 2011-12 to 
2015, GHG reductions have plateaued or slightly risen, 
again paralleling the hovering annual deforestation rates. 
Broadly speaking, it can be said that there have been 
no further reductions in emissions in the 2010s and 
deforestation remains the largest single source of GHG 
emissions in Brazil.  
On 30 June 2015, under the US-Brazil climate agree-
ment, Brazil pledged that it would restore and reforest 
12 million hectares of its forests—an area about the 
size of England—by 2030 and pursue ‘policies aimed at 
eliminating illegal deforestation’. However, governments 
persisted in their efforts to convert native forest land 
into productive frontiers, and at present there are many 
initiatives to lessen the conservation status of nature 
and indigenous lands, and a strong pressure to reduce 
the environmental conditions in the licencing process.
The advantages of protecting forests 
The social and economic advantages of protecting for-
ests abound: 
1.  The production of timber in the Amazon’s national 
and state forests, from areas managed according to the 
model forest concession, has the potential to generate 
between $R1.2 billion (US$ 38 million) and $R2.2 billion 
(US$70 million) per year, more than all of the native 
timber currently extracted in the country.
2.  Visitors to Brazil’s 67 National Parks have the poten-
tial to generate between $R1.6 billion (US$51 million) 
and $R1.8 billion (US$57 million) per year (based on 
2016 tourism estimates).
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
6          www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au
Figure 1: Total emissions of GHG’s in Brazil 1990-2015 (in million T CO2 GWP)
Source: The Brazilian System of Greenhouse Gas Emissions Estimates (SEEG)
3.  Studies indicate that public visitation in federal and 
state conservation areas of about 20 million people has 
the potential to generate approximately $R2.2 billion 
(US$70 million).
4.  In relation to the different uses of water by socie-
ty, 80% of the country’s hydroelectricity comes from 
sources that have at least one tributary downstream 
of a conservation area, 9% of drinking water is directly 
collected in conservation areas, 26% is collected from 
sources downstream of conservation areas, and 4% of 
the water used in agriculture and irrigation is taken from 
sources inside or downstream of conservation areas.
5.  In watersheds and water sources with the greatest 
forest cover, the cost associated with treating water for 
public supply is less than the cost of treatment in areas 
with low forest cover.
The environmental advantages of forest conservation 
policies are not only significant for Brazil, but the world. 
• The Brazilian Amazon stores 60 billion tonnes of 
carbon, or 8% of the total carbon present in the 
atmosphere.15  Slash-and-burn policies would cause 
this locked up carbon dioxide to be released into 
the atmosphere, adding very significantly to the rate 
of global warming. Indeed, if Amazon clearance rates 
had remained at their 2005 levels of 19 000 km2 per 
year, the atmosphere would contain an extra 3.2 
billion tonnes of carbon dioxide.16  
• Strong forest conservation policies would also help 
reduce erratic rainfall and subsequent river flow 
in Brazil, as well as reduce soil nutrient depletion, 
erosion, loss of biodiversity, and the extinction rate 
of various plant and animal species.
Policy opportunities to help protect Brazil’s forests  
1.  Supporting the adoption of policies that help improve 
land use efficiency is critically important to address the 
dual challenges of forest conservation and supporting 
agriculture.18  One of the most important policy dis-
cussions in this space involves technology. Agricultural 
research has largely relied on cooperation between the 
state-run Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation 
and local private producers. This cooperation has proved 
fruitful in helping modernise soil management, cultiva-
tion techniques, biochemical techniques, the adaptation 
of soybean varieties, and cattle raising efficiency, among 
many others.19  Allocating international resources to 
boost agricultural research and development, with the 
overarching goal to make land use more efficient, would 
prove very useful in further reducing deforestation. 
2.  Improved satellite monitoring technology could 
further increase the effectiveness of Amazon law en-
forcement activities. The implementation of the Real 
Time System for Detection of Deforestation (DETER), 
a satellite-based system that enables frequent and quick 
identification of deforestation hot spots, was a significant 
driver of the 2000s deforestation slowdown in the Am-
azon.20  Overcoming DETER’s incapacity to see through 
clouds and obtaining land cover imagery in higher reso-
lutions are two examples of technological advances that 
could enhance law enforcement targeting capability and 
add significant value to Brazil’s conservation efforts.
3.  Brazil should consider reallocating incentives and 
subsidies that encourage deforestation.21  For example, 
reducing the availability of credit has encouraged small 
landholders to sell their farms to large agri-businesses 
and relocate to the frontier parts of the Amazon where 
land is cheaper, pushing the frontier further North 
and Centre-West. This frontier has also seen the rapid 
expansion of highways and roads, mainly funded by the 
states and local sources, which has further incentivised 
agricultural-induced deforestation. Indeed, decisive action 
is required to establish secure property rights, for with-
out these, settlements will continue to expand.
4.  The benefits of forest conservation policies need 
promotion.  At present in Brazil, the dominant percep-
tion of these policies is that they constitute an obstacle 
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
  www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au              7 
 
Indigenous people and farmers 
Brazilian governments have long been criticised 
for land use policies that disrupt and displace 
indigenous populations. But tensions between 
farmers and indigenous groups still run high.17  
Adopting policies that help farmers use already 
cleared land more efficiently holds great poten-
tial to satisfy the key players on both sides of the 
debate.
to economic and social development. This view is shared 
by most political groups, decision-makers and the private 
sector. Cultivating and participating in an alliance with 
sympathetic groups in-country to reverse this percep-
tion would help maximise the benefits generated by 
forest conservation. Special attention should be paid to 
counter the growing influence of the ruralista lobby over 
land use policymaking. 
5.  Financial support could be provided to help regen-
erate areas already open and degraded.22  Despite the 
argument that Brazil’s Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions is independent of any expectations of 
receiving foreign financing, if that were to become availa-
ble, goals could be revised or met earlier than expected. 
Finding an international funding mechanism that can 
funnel significant amounts of money to reforestation or 
restoration can be of tremendous importance for Brazil 
over the next 15 years.  The same is true for research 
on how to decrease the cost of reforestation/restora-
tion.
6.  International certification of agricultural products 
originating from low carbon agriculture practices can 
create a differentiated market for these products, and 
perhaps should be given easier or cheaper access to 
markets that traditionally place barriers, such as the EU 
and the US.
Modernise public transport in 
megacities
This section examines the urban transport sector.  We 
find that policies that help upgrade and expand pub-
lic transport networks—particularly in Brazil’s two 
megacities, Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo—can deliver 
more economic, social and environmental benefits than 
expanding roads and highways, and could also instigate a 
low pollution economic recovery.   
A brief policy history
In the 1950s and 1960s, Toyota, Volkswagen, Chevrolet, 
Ford and Fiat made Brazil their foreign production base. 
Autos were produced in increasingly larger quantities 
for domestic consumption and export. The expansion of 
the auto industry caused urban public transport sys-
tems—trains and trams—to be gradually replaced with 
asphalt roads and cars.23    
The 1973 oil crisis altered this direction. In 1976, deci-
sion-making for urban public transport was centralised, 
removing responsibility from the states, and upgrades 
and new rail and bus systems in several metropolitan 
areas commenced. Soon after, the World Bank described 
Brazil’s bus transit plans as ‘the most imaginative and 
radical in the world’.24 
In the 1990s, Brazil’s urban public transport suffered 
from a lack of interest from private investors and gov-
ernments at all levels, national economic woes, and the 
Constitutional reform of 1988, which shifted responsi-
bility for urban public transport back to the states and 
municipalities.25  
By the 2000s Brazil’s urban public transport was woe-
fully inadequate. In São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, hor-
rendous traffic congestion, dangerous neighbourhoods 
that prohibited walking or cycling, poor subway systems, 
and crooked sleepers on train lines—which are rarely 
realigned, causing  trains to wobble and often derail, 
deterring commuter patronage—has meant commuters 
would spend hours on crammed busses for short trips.26 
As a 2005 report by the Federal Ministry of Cities sug-
gests, this situation was unlikely to improve:
 
…there is little public investment destined to service 
urban public transportation infrastructure, contrary 
to the expansion of roads systems, which is rapidly 
appropriated by automobiles.27   
In 2012, the federal Growth Acceleration Program 
(PAC) allocated $R110 billion (US$46 million) in funding 
for urban mobility development.28  This funding was to 
incentivise cities with over 20 000 inhabitants—about 
3065 cities—to incorporate urban mobility planning 
into their larger development plans (eg. affordable public 
transportation, exclusive bus lanes and bike routes, and 
implementing congestion pricing policies).
More recently, Rio has received dedicated federal, state 
and local government funding packages to upgrade 
public transport, such as bus rapid transit systems, in 
preparation for the 2014 soccer World Cup and 2016 
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
8          www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
  www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au              9 
Olympic Games.29  São Paulo, by contrast, is considering 
creating more highways and widening existing roads, a 
short-term solution to reduce congestion that critics say 
only reinforces a car culture.
Brazil’s automotive industry is currently in steep de-
cline. In 2014 vehicle sales—including cars, light vehicles, 
trucks and buses—were down 7.1% on 2013 figures.30  
And more than 12 000 automotive jobs were slashed 
over the corresponding period of time.31  Despite this, 
car ownership rates in Brazil are expected to more than 
double by 2030.32 
The advantages of modernising urban public 
transport networks in Rio and São Paulo
Significant public health benefits stem from reduced 
road traffic and fuel usage. The World Health Organisa-
tion (WHO) finds that outdoor air pollution—particu-
late matter (PM2.5 and PM10)—in São Paulo and Rio de 
Janeiro far exceed recommended levels (Table 1). Indeed 
particulates in Rio are over three times recommended 
levels.33  The WHO explains that reducing particulates 
from road traffic and fuel usage can reduce the burden 
of disease from stroke, heart disease, lung cancer and 
both chronic and acute respiratory diseases, including 
asthma. The Lancet Commission of 2015, comprising 
the world’s preeminent medical professionals, strongly 
supports this view.34 
Traffic congestion also produces tremendous economic 
costs. A recent study found that traffic congestion cost 
the cities of Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo US$43 billion 
in 2013 alone. The loss amounts to about 8% of each 
metropolitan area’s GDP, and 2% of Brazil’s entire GDP.36 
Public transport modernisation, by contrast, combats 
traffic congestion while also providing benefits such as 
better health, lower stress levels, lower road accident 
rates, reduced noise and air pollution, and better quality 
of life.37 
Brazil’s public transport modernisation is already attract-
ing strong international interest from private investors 
(eg. Rockefeller 100 Resilient Cities programme), NGOs 
(eg. World Resources Institute Ross Centre for Sustain-
able Cities), and governments (eg. China). Significant em-
ployment opportunities exist for Brazilians by expanding 
infrastructure programs for rapid mass-transit systems.38 
In 2012, Brazil’s transport sector accounted for about 
half of the country’s energy-related CO2 emissions from 
the combustion of fossil fuel, road usage was overwhelm-
ingly the most prominent contributor (Table 2). These 
emissions were largely generated in urban areas and 
were due to increased motorization and congestion. Fuel 
combustion is clearly the main culprit.
Oil and ethanol expansion, which would accompany 
urban road expansion, presents considerable risks. First, 
the ongoing corruption investigations into Petrobras, a 
state-controlled oil company, combined with the rapid 
expansion of US shale gas, the increasing competitiveness 
of Mexico’s energy industry, and growing global concern 
about climate change make investing in Brazil’s off-shore 
pre-salt oil reserves a risky bet.
Also, the economic viability of the ethanol industry is 
premised on high oil prices, and low food prices, but 
price volatility is the hallmark of both, discouraging long-
Table 1: WHO Urban Air Pollution Database of 201435
Units: micrograms per cubic metre of air on average per one 
year
Table 2: International Energy Agency assessment of CO2 
emissions from fuel combustion by sector in Brazil in 
2012.39  
Units: million tonnes of CO2
term investors. 
The benefits of these industries are also contested. For 
example, the World Energy Council (WEC) confirms 
that ‘to fuel its transportation sector, Brazil has em-
barked on developing its pre-salt reserves’,40 however, 
the limited capacity of the atmosphere and oceans to 
absorb the ensuing carbon emissions has led some to 
describe the pre-salt discoveries as the world’s carbon 
bombs.41  In addition, studies show that the rural employ-
ment opportunities generated by expanding the biofuel 
industry have been significantly overstated largely due to 
mechanisation replacing workers.42    
Policy opportunities to help expand Brazil’s  
urban public transport networks 
1.  International finance could be allocated to help 
maintain and upgrade existing public transport networks 
in São Paulo and Rio (among others such as Salvador, 
Belo Horizonte, Manaus),  as well as expand urban 
public transport infrastructure. In these cities, day-to-day 
maintenance and upgrades are not seen as priorities for 
governments. Moreover, both cities need plenty of new 
railways and other public works. The World Economic 
Forum ranks Brazil 107th out of 144 countries on the 
quality of its infrastructure. China, and some private 
investment banks and equity firms, are allocating money 
for public works in Brazil. However, programs such as 
the PAC, and agencies such as the BNDES, are reducing 
infrastructure investment.  
2.  The expansion of urban public transport networks 
requires an influx of experienced engineers. Rio’s 
mountainous terrain, proximity to the sea, and complex 
soil structure pose major engineering challenges to the 
development of a subway network, however they are 
not insurmountable with experienced practitioners as 
well as quality teaching and training. 
3.  Public transport needs to be more affordable for the 
poor, the people who use it most. In São Paulo and Rio, 
the much utilised bus service is low quality, uncomforta-
ble, and slow—a bus trip can take twice as long as in an 
efficient system. Relocations of inner city favela resi-
dents often result in communities being pushed further 
from the fringes. As a result, many people have to spend 
a major share of their income and their time on long 
commutes to low paying jobs. For a daily commuter, a 
bus fare can amount to about a sixth of the minimum 
wage of $R724 a month. Despite this, in February 2014, 
bus fares in Rio were raised by $R0.25, from $R2.75 to 
$R3.00, causing widespread protests.
4.  Future bilateral and multilateral agreements on 
climate change could stipulate a specific emissions re-
duction target on transport. Transport is conspicuously 
absent from the recent US-Brazil agreement, despite the 
sector being responsible for nearly half of Brazil’s energy 
sector emissions.
5.  The strategic deployment of tollways can deter auto-
mobile expansion. The WEC found that the use of effi-
ciency policies (tollways) could cut the vehicle expansion 
rate in Brazil by 20% to 30% by 2030.43  
Conclusion
This briefing paper shows that a low pollution economic 
recovery—which involves policies that would help scale 
up wind power, protect forests, and modernise urban 
public transport networks—is not only possible, but can 
generate a combination of economic, social and envi-
ronmental  advantages that the alternative high pollution 
policy options struggle to match. 
Brazil has a number of choices to make that will shape 
its future economic growth and social development 
pathway. The low pollution pathway, which the current 
Temer administration can pursue through adjustments 
to its current policy approaches, can deliver growth and 
prosperity while improving eco-systems and potential-
ly offsetting some of the damaging impacts of climate 
change. 
The Brazilian government now has the chance to seize 
the opportunity for a low pollution economic recovery. 
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
10          www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au
References
1. Dilma Rousseff, ‘Statement by the President of the Federative Republic of Brazil at the Climate Summit’, UN Cli-
mate Summit, 23 September 2014. 
2. Dilma Rousseff, ‘Remarks by President Obama and President Rousseff of Brazil in Joint Press Conference’, The 
White House, 30 June 2015.
3. Edwardo Viola and Larissa Basso, ‘Brazilian Energy-Climate Policy and Politics towards Low Carbon Develop-
ment’, Global Society, 29, 3 (2015), 436. 
4. Kathryn Hochstetler and Genia Kostka, ‘Wind and Solar Power in Brazil and China: Interests, State-Business Rela-
tions, and Policy Outcomes’, Global Environmental Politics, 15, 3 (2015), 74-94.  
5. Carlos Young, ‘Green Growth and Social Inclusion: Possibilities and Challenges for the Brazilian Economy’, Serie 
Crecimiento Verde e Inclusivo, Working Paper 176 (Marzo 2015), 18-19. 
6. Hochstetler and Kostka, ‘Wind and Solar Power in Brazil and China,’ 82. 
7. Rousseff, ‘Remarks by President Obama and President Rousseff ’, 30 June 2015.
8. Louise Cord et. al., ‘Shared Prosperity and Poverty Eradiation in Latin America and the Caribbean’, World Bank, 79.
9. Young, ‘Green Growth and Social Inclusion,’ 19. 
10. Ottmar Edenhofer, Ramón Pichs-Madruga and Youba Sokona, ‘Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change 
Mitigation: Summary for Policymaker and Technical Summary’, Special Report for the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, 2012, 95-103.
11. Weaner Baer, The Brazilian Economy: Growth and Development, 7th ed. (Boulder: Lynne Reinner Publishers, Inc., 
2014), 336. 
12. Dan Nepstad et. al., ‘Slowing Amazon Deforestation through Public Policy and Interventions in Beef and Soy Sup-
ply Chains’, Science, 344, 6188 (June 2014). 
13. Prodes Taxas Anuais, http://www.obt.inpe.br/prodes/prodes_1988_2014.htm
14. Prodes Taxas Anuais. 
15. Baer, The Brazilian Economy, 335.
16. ‘The Amazon: Cutting Down on Cutting Down’, The Economist, 7 July 2014.
17. ‘Brazil Indigenous Leader’s Killing Raises Tension’, BBC, 3 September 2015; ‘Brazil Indigenous Group Guarani-Kaio-
wa ‘Attacked’, BBC, 6 September 2015. 
18. ‘Improving Agricultural Productivity in Brazil: The Unmet Potential of Price Risk Policy’, Climate Policy Initiative, 
January 2015. 
19. ‘Towards Efficient land Use in Brazil’, The New Climate Economy, 9. 
20. ‘DETERring Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon: Environmental Monitoring and Law Enforcement’, Climate 
Policy Initiative, May 2013. 
21. ‘Towards Efficient land Use in Brazil’, 9.
22.  ‘US-Brazil Joint Statement on Climate Change’, 30 June 2015.
23. ‘Fury and Frustration in Brazil as Fares Rise and Transport Projects Flounder’, The Guardian, 6 February 2014. 
24. ‘Staff Appraisal Report: Brazil, Fourth Urban Transport Project’, Report no 6426a-BR, World Bank, May 1987.
25. ‘Case Study: The Brazilian Experience in Planning, Implementing and Operating Public Transport on Separated 
Road and Light Rail Travelways’, in Provision of Travelway Space for Urban Public Transport in Developing Countries, 
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements, Nairobi 1993, 117. 
26. Teresa Meade,  A Brief History of Brazil (New York: Facts on File, Inc, 2003), 227.  
27. José Carlos Xavier and Renato Boareto, ‘The Implementation of Brazil Sustainable Urban Mobility Policy’, in Com-
petition and Ownership in Land Passenger Transport Selected Papers from the 9th International Conference (Thredbo 9), 
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
  www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au              11 
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
12          www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au
September 2006. 
28. ‘Brazilian Cities Seek New Paths with Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans’, World Resources Institute, March 2014. 
29. ‘To Maracanã and Beyond: World Cup Brings Sustainable Transport Benefits to Brazil’, World Resources Institute, 
July 2014. 
30. According to auto maker association Anfavea
31. ‘Brazil Auto Sales, Production and Exports Dropped in 2014: Consumers Dissuaded From Big-Ticket Purchases 
by Economic Slowdown, Inflation Pressures’, Wall Street Journal, 8 January 2015.
32. ‘Transport, Car Ownership, and Vkt – Brazil’, Clean Air Institute, 2014. 
33. ‘Ambient (outdoor) Air Pollution Database, by Country and City’, World Health Organisation, March 2014.
34. Nick Watts et. al., ‘Health and Climate Change: Policy Responses to Protect Public Health’, Lancet Commission, June 
2015, 1. 
35. Figures found in ‘Ambient (outdoor) Air Pollution Database, by Country and City’, World Health Organisation, 
March 2014.
36. ‘Study: Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo lost USD 43 billion from Traffic Congestion in 2013’, World Resources Institute 
- The City Fix, July 2014. 
37. ‘4 Inspirations for Sustainable Transport from Rio de Janeiro’, World Resources Institute, March 2015. 
38. ‘Six Key Issues the US-Brazil Climate Change Announcement Could Have Addressed, But Didn’t’, The Brookings 
Institute, 30 June 2015. 
39. ‘CO2 Emissions From Fuel Combustion: Highlights’, International Energy Agency, 2014, 56. 
40. ‘Global Transport Scenarios 2050’, World Energy Council, 2011, 47. 
41. ‘Six Key Issues the US-Brazil Climate Change’, 30 June 2015.
42.  Young, ‘Green Growth and Social Inclusion,’ 25.
43. ‘Transport, Car Ownership, and Vkt’, 2014. 
* A note on reference style: to ensure clarity and presentation consistency with the Briefing Paper style, full web URL’s are not included in the 
reference list.  Readers wishing this information should contact Production Editor, Claire Denby cdenby@unimelb.edu.au
Authors: Research Fellow Dr Ben Parr, Melbourne Sustainable Society Institute (MSSI); Professor Carlos Eduardo F. 
Young, Institute of Economics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (IE-UFRJ); and Public Policy Fellow Professor Don 
Henry, Melbourne Sustainable Society Institute (MSSI)
MSSI at the University of Melbourne aims to provide concise, accessible briefings on topical sustainability issues in the 
Briefing Papers series. Each paper explores a topic country or area of concern and contention in a way that informs 
the general reader about the opportunities, challenges, and hopes for action. The papers translate sustainability re-
search findings to provide the reader with information that is reliable and current. 
Acknowledgements: The authors are very grateful to the following people for their comments and suggestions on 
earlier drafts of the paper: Kathryn Hochstetler, Roberto Vámos, Cathy Alexander, Simone Robinson and Brendan 
Gleeson. This project was partly funded by a grant provided by the University of Melbourne’s International Research 
and Research Training Fund.
Melbourne Sustainable Society Institute
Level 3, Melbourne School of Design
University of Melbourne
VIC,  Australia
@MSSIMelb
Briefing Paper 8
April 2017
www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au/briefing-papers
Published by the University of Melbourne.
The views and opinions contained within this publication are solely those of the author/s and do not reflect those 
held by MSSI of the University of Melbourne or any other relevant party.
Briefing Paper 8 - Brazil
  www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au              13 
