The Quest for Economic Recovery: Innovative Development and KM Perspectives

Knowledge Management 
for Competitive 
Advantage During 
Economic Crisis
Patricia Ordoñez de Pablos
University of Oviedo, Spain
Luis Jovell Turró
Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, Spain
Robert D. Tennyson
University of Minnesota, USA
Jingyuan Zhao
University of Québec at Montréal, Canada
A volume in the Advances in Business Strategy 
and Competitive Advantage (ABSCA) Book Series 
Published in the United States of America by 
Business Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA, USA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2015 by IGI Global.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or distributed in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the names of the products or 
companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the trademark or registered trademark.
   Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material. The views expressed in this book are those of the 
authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
For electronic access to this publication, please contact: eresources@igi-global.com. 
  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 
Knowledge management for competitive advantage during economic crisis / Patricia Ordonez de Pablos, Lluis Jovell Turro, 
Robert D. Tennyson, and Jingyuan Zhao, editors. 
       pages cm 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
  Summary: “This book brings together the various approaches that affect the superiority of a company’s organizational 
performance and the gains they can make over their competitors by focusing on concepts such as organizational learning and 
intellectual capital”-- Provided by publisher. 
  ISBN 978-1-4666-6457-9 (hardcover : alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-1-4666-6458-6 (ebook) -- ISBN 978-1-4666-6460-9 (print 
& perpetual access)  1.  Knowledge management. 2.  Organizational learning. 3.  Intellectual capital.  I. Ord??ez de Pablos, 
Patricia, 1975- editor.  
 
  HD30.2.K6368773 2014 
  658.4’038--dc23 
 
                                                            2014026547 
 
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Business Strategy and Competitive Advantage (ABSCA) 
(ISSN: 2327-3429; eISSN: 2327-3437)
Managing Director: 
Acquisitions Editor: 
Production Editor: 
Development Editor: 
Typesetter: 
Cover Design: 
Lindsay Johnston 
Kayla Wolfe 
Christina Henning 
Allison McGinniss 
Michael Brehm 
Jason Mull 
242
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  13
The Quest for Economic 
Recovery:
Innovative Development 
and KM Perspectives
ABSTRACT
Most organizations respond to an economic crisis by focusing on operational efficiency and/or on intel-
lectual capital utilization and innovation. The conjecture is that intellectual capital confers distinct com-
petitive advantage to an enterprise via knowledge management and knowledge spillovers and improved 
innovation capacity. Despite mixed empirical evidence to support this claim, intellectual capital and 
knowledge management remain at the forefront of an organization’s agenda during an economic downturn. 
Recent surveys from the field indicate some dissatisfaction with practical knowledge management. These 
findings are difficult to interpret because at the same time organizations appear to adopt the position that 
management of knowledge resources is extremely important from a strategic perspective. The objective 
of this chapter is to provide some new perspectives on what drives success in the knowledge economy 
and to demonstrate how knowledge management is the ideal response to the challenge of innovation.
INTRODUCTION
The greatest challenge that businesses, markets 
and countries are facing today is the continuing 
international financial crisis (Pressman, 2011). 
In order to assess the impact of the crisis on eco-
nomic performance, there is a need to clarify the 
concept and identify its structural characteristics 
by borrowing elements of systems theory.
In any complex system, a crisis is a period 
during which the system functions poorly (but 
does not break down); an immediate corrective 
action is necessary to stop further disintegration 
of performance; and yet the causes of the dys-
Mariza Tsakalerou
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
Rongbin W. B. Lee
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-6457-9.ch013
243
The Quest for Economic Recovery
 
function are not known (or are so many) that it is 
difficult to take an informed decision to reverse 
the situation (Dayton, 2004).
In systems theory, an “attractor” is a subset of 
the state space of a dynamic system, i.e. a set of 
physical properties towards which a system tends 
to evolve, irrespective of any starting conditions. 
Parameter values that get close enough to an attrac-
tor remain close even if slightly disturbed. A crisis 
is the sudden appearance of a new “attractor” or 
the disappearance of an existing one. The param-
eters of a dynamic system converge towards the 
new attractor or diverge away from their previous 
values leading to a qualitatively different behavior. 
In general, crises result in discontinuous changes 
in the attractor, and different types of crises may 
be distinguished on the basis of the different types 
of changes that they induce (Ruelle, 1981).
While crises are unexpected and of an unknown 
cause, the dynamics of the system may exhibit 
slow transients over time before parameter values 
exit the neighborhood of the old attractor. This is 
the primary reason why the onset of crisis condi-
tions is rarely recognized early and certainly not 
before system performance is seriously degraded 
(Santella et al. 2009).
More broadly, crises are defined as non-routine 
events that create high levels of uncertainty and 
are perceived as threats to an organization’s goals 
(Seeger et al. 1998). At the organization level, 
crises are thought of as imposed processes of 
transformation when the old system can no longer 
be maintained and there is a need for change. (If 
change is not needed, the crisis has led to systemic 
failure.)
In this context, an economic crisis can be 
described as a period of dismal economic per-
formance for a business, a market or a country. 
The economy is a very complex system, and for 
it to dysfunction, the transient conditions have to 
be present over a long period of time. While an 
economic crisis is perceived as part of the busi-
ness cycle, most economic crises are unexpected 
and it is usually difficult to determine their exact 
cause. Handling an economic crisis is thus a very 
complicated affair, and the need for change often 
contrasts with the ingrained organizational reac-
tion to simply improve efficiencies.
Most organizations respond to an economic 
crisis by adopting one of two extremes: focus on 
operational efficiency or on intellectual capital 
utilization and innovation. Unfortunately there is 
a strong preference for the former. The majority of 
organizations in an economic crisis try to downsize 
and to improve their productivity by cutting costs 
across the board and choosing to reduce their in-
novation capacity. While many organizations may 
merely survive an economic downturn via such 
conservative approaches, most will not be better 
prepared during the recovery period and they will 
not be able to keep up with the competition. On 
the other hand, organizations that switch to the 
knowledge economy may eventually become win-
ners, but they risk their survival when gambling 
their resources exclusively on innovation. Those 
rare organizations that focus on both efficiency 
and innovation typically survive an economic 
crisis smoothly.
Empirical evidence suggests that organizations 
should start considering an economic crisis as 
an opportunity rather than as a threat: an oppor-
tunity to reflect and to stimulate innovation. An 
opportunity to reconfigure business processes by 
eliminating outdated or unprofitable processes 
and products and by adopting new technologies 
(Caballero & Hammour, 1994).
Developing an effective knowledge manage-
ment strategy is key to surviving an economic 
crisis and to prepare for the future. Yet the period 
of economic downturn is a time of uncertainty 
and ambiguity, and an organization is often hard-
pressed to take stock of its intellectual capital and 
to make a switch that would require behavioral 
changes, while drastic cuts are being pursued at 
all levels. In order for knowledge management to 
succeed as a tool during economic crises, it has to 
244
The Quest for Economic Recovery
 
be approached in a results-oriented format with 
clear directions and transparent methodologies 
that have been proven effective in the marketplace.
In this framework, the objective of this chapter 
is to provide a knowledge management perspec-
tive and to suggest ways that organizations should 
allocate their resources to investments, and espe-
cially to intangibles (intellectual capital), in their 
quest for economic recovery. When operating in 
a downturn context, it is always important to de-
velop long-term strategies while applying specific 
tactics as soon as a crisis is detected (Caballero 
& Hammour, 1996).
INTELLECTUAL CAPITAL AND 
ORGANIZATIONAL VALUE
The general consensus is that effective manage-
ment of intangible (intellectual or knowledge) 
assets within an enterprise often serves as a source 
of competitive advantage and hence value creation 
for the organization (Bonfour & Edvinsson, 2005). 
Intellectual capital -from intellectual property and 
patents through staff technical skills to relation-
ships and networking with customers- has been 
identified as a critical business success factor. 
National governments, international organiza-
tions and professional accounting associations 
have promoted the development of intellectual 
capital reporting to assist with company valua-
tions (Hofmann, 2008).
The causal relationship between intellectual 
capital and organizational value has been the 
subject of significant academic research. How-
ever, there are mixed results. While the majority 
of the studies demonstrate that intellectual capital 
is positively and significantly associated with 
organizational performance, some authors claim 
that the linkage has been generally weak, if at 
all present (Pulic, 2004). For example, recently 
(Diez et al, 2010) found no evidence of a signifi-
cant relationship between the use of intellectual 
capital and value creation and (Chang and Hsieh, 
2011) found that a company’s intellectual capital 
in general, surprisingly, has a negative impact on 
its financial and market performance.
This mixed picture is due to the fact that there is 
no widely accepted definition of intellectual capi-
tal (OECD, 2008). Defining intellectual capital 
as a set of intangibles (“knowledge”) that drives 
organizational performance (“value”) assumes a 
priori an existing correlation between IC and or-
ganizational value. In fact, in almost all definitions 
of intellectual capital all irrelevant intangibles 
(i.e. those that are assumed to have no association 
with the firm’s future potential) are excluded; this 
renders the weak linkage even more problematic. 
On the other side of the equation, the concept of 
organizational value is equally vague, ranging 
from the narrow (use of financial indicators) to 
the broad (inclusion of non-financial, operational 
indicators). The situation is exacerbated by the 
fact that measuring intellectual capital variables 
is difficult and the objectivity of information is 
often doubtful (Pulic, 2000). Indeed intellectual 
capital is a complex phenomenon of interactions, 
transformations and complementarities.
Recent surveys from the field indicate that a 
similarly confusing picture exists within organi-
zations. A common observation is that there is 
some dissatisfaction with knowledge management 
in terms of its application (Griffiths & Moon, 
2011) and that the concept of KM itself could be 
in decline (Griffiths, 2011).
These findings are difficult to interpret 
because they co-exist with a deeply ingrained 
position within organizations that management 
of knowledge resources is extremely important 
from a strategic perspective. In the quest to provide 
some fresh knowledge management perspectives 
during an economic downturn, there is a need to 
codify the views in the field and present them in 
a coherent and succinct manner.
245
The Quest for Economic Recovery
 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT: 
THE VIEW FROM THE FIELD
By focusing on surveys that were completed during 
an economic crisis one can capture the view from 
the field at a critical juncture. The following obser-
vations reflect the results of premier international 
surveys in knowledge management (KMO, 2011; 
Rigby & Bilodeau, 2013; Heisig P. & Samuel A., 
2013) as well as evidence presented by the indus-
trial partners of the Knowledge Management and 
Innovation Research Center (KMIRC) at Hong 
Kong Polytechnic University. The relationship 
between KM and the society and the economy 
today is presented along four main themes:
• What is the importance placed on knowl-
edge management within organizations?
• What are the relevant questions and con-
cerns in applied knowledge management?
• Which methodological approach would be 
most feasible in practice?
• What timeline would be appropriate for 
knowledge management interventions?
In the sequence, each of these questions is 
addressed separately.
What Is the Importance Placed 
on Knowledge Management 
within Organizations?
While most organizations claim that research in 
knowledge economy and knowledge society is 
important or highly important, their comments 
reflect lukewarm support. From those who believe 
that the knowledge society is well established (and 
thus no distinct activities need to be undertaken) 
to those that dismiss the concept as something that 
belongs to the field of sociology, it is clear percep-
tions in the field vary greatly. Nevertheless, even 
in this milieu some social issues emerge naturally.
• Democratization of knowledge: in to-
day’s world more people know more things 
than ever before in human history, and that 
has huge implications for society.
• Proliferation and influence of open 
source knowledge: The knowledge soci-
ety presupposes a kind of openness that is 
needed for a thriving free flow of ideas and 
creativity.
• Varied levels of openness worldwide: 
many societies today have issues from 
freedom of expression to cultural impedi-
ments to the flow of knowledge.
• Open education initiatives: From open 
software to open-access databases, ad-
justing our higher education systems is of 
paramount importance in creating an en-
vironment that recognises knowledge as a 
commodity.
As regards the economic domain, the pertinent 
issues are:
• Knowledge is becoming more impor-
tant as an input, as a product: Codified 
knowledge is becoming more significant as 
a component of economic relations.
• Knowledge disparity is a driver for busi-
ness and innovation: Institutions and 
companies able to derive and apply more 
knowledge win; organisations that fail to 
build capabilities enabling them to par-
ticipate in the evolving global networks of 
knowledge stay behind.
• Recognizing knowledge as the main or-
ganizational asset: This changes the eco-
nomic framework of businesses and makes 
firms see intellectual capital as their main 
investment.
• Varied stages of development in the 
knowledge economy: As the world econ-
omy is evolving into a knowledge-based 
246
The Quest for Economic Recovery
 
model, not all countries are at the same 
level of development.
• Not all knowledge-based societies have a 
knowledge-based economy: Having how-
ever a KM strategy is essential to succeed 
in any of the two.
What Are the Relevant Questions 
and Concerns in Applied 
Knowledge Management?
The majority of the firms understand that so far 
KM has been explored mostly at the organisational 
level, and that future research should include the 
societal, political and economic levels as well. The 
relationship between knowledge and economic 
development is presumed clear, but the relation-
ship between knowledge management in compa-
nies and organizations and the macroeconomic 
environment is not so clear. The core issue is the 
understanding of the dynamics of knowledge-
based value creation, regarding the new theory of 
the firm, and from that the knowledge economy 
and knowledge society.
KM is about bridging the right knowledge to 
the right people at the right time. This can be done 
at the organizational level, the inter-organizational 
level and even at the regional, national or inter-
national levels. It is probably a reflection of the 
pedigree and experiences of the firms that they 
think that basically taking the same propositions 
and hypotheses that exist at the firm level analy-
sis, and just extrapolating them up to the region, 
province, or country level will suffice. Within 
this context, the following questions and concerns 
appear under a multitude of guises:
• Significance of KM as a value driver in to-
day’s competitive world:
 ◦ Defining the extent that KM contrib-
utes to the social-economic develop-
ment of a society.
 ◦ Measures through which KM can 
help organizations and the society 
in general in times of demographical 
change.
 ◦ Identifying the impact the KM strat-
egy of major company can have at the 
societal level.
• KM and regional development policy:
 ◦ How to deploy KM as a strategic eco-
nomic lever for regional or national 
development.
 ◦ Knowledge cities, knowledge innova-
tion zones and government policies.
 ◦ Problems in integrating regional 
knowledge strategies into political 
agendas.
 ◦ Assessment and diagnosis of various 
aspects/dimensions of KM applicable 
to a wider context - cities, regions, 
countries.
• Required competencies of the knowledge 
managers in the knowledge economy:
 ◦ Role of the knowledge manager in in-
formal learning and lifelong learning 
in the organizational context.
 ◦ What are the barriers to sharing of in-
sights and good practice in KM.
 ◦ Organizational KM as a stimulus for 
social innovation.
• Business clusters and KM:
 ◦ Identifying the interactive links be-
tween KM, organizational learning 
and clustering.
 ◦ Methods through which KM can help 
improve a cluster’s performance.
 ◦ Macroeconomic studies and compari-
sons between clusters.
Which Methodological Approach 
Would Be Most Feasible in Practice?
Most firms recognize that it is difficult to quantify 
and measure knowledge, especially since they 
invest so much in it. How can one measure the 
intellectual wealth of a knowledge society? Intel-
lectual capital is seen as the national driver of the 
247
The Quest for Economic Recovery
 
economy, yet the lack of adequate quantification 
means that it is easy to cut down on the knowledge 
part of a business since it cannot be measured. 
There is an overwhelming call for an increased 
emphasis on quantitative methods focusing on:
• A new generation of intellectual capital 
reporting: Integrating value reporting as 
well as the techniques and the resources to 
understand the specific value dimensions 
of the knowledge economy.
• Competitive benchmarking: Quantitative 
benchmarking of successful cases so that 
good practices can be shared among enter-
prises and within enterprises to improve 
performance.
What Timeline Would Be 
Appropriate for Knowledge 
Management Interventions?
Most firms are split between short and medium 
timelines for intervention. Their comments re-
veal that there is not much significant difference 
between the two groups. In essence, everybody 
agrees about the urgency of attacking the problems 
related to the economic crisis (hence the short-
term horizon) but many understand the practical 
difficulties involved and propose a more realistic 
(medium-term) timeline.
CONCLUSION
The quest for economic recovery places increased 
emphasis on developing knowledge. Knowledge 
management is perfectly positioned to respond 
to the challenges of innovation, yet most firms 
struggle with practical applications of the concept. 
While at the strategic level the management of 
knowledge resources is deemed very important, 
this is often not communicated effectively through 
the layers of the organization. Knowledge manage-
ment appears to be functioning in isolation and 
primarily addressed through technology-based 
solutions.
During an economic crisis, organizations have 
to cope with increased demands for higher-quality 
services and products. Effective organizations in 
the knowledge economy succeed by basing their 
adaptive capacity and their ability to innovate on 
their people empowered by new technologies. Bal-
ancing operational costs and the need to innovate 
appears to be the solution for knowledge-driven 
organizations.
There is a significant need to stop viewing 
knowledge management as a technology function 
and academic debate should shift towards address-
ing real-world challenges. Innovative development 
depends on knowledge management being fully 
tuned with the processes of the firm, deeply in-
grained in the human resources strategies of the 
organization and totally integrated in practical 
solutions and best practices identified in the field.
REFERENCES
Bounfour, A., & Edvinsson, L. (2005). Intellectual 
capital for communities – nations, regions, and 
cities. Oxford: Butterworth- Heinemann.
Caballero, R., & Hammour, M. (1994). The 
Cleansing Effect of Recessions. The American 
Economic Review, 84(5), 1350–1368.
Caballero, R., & Hammour, M. (1996). On the 
Timing and Efficiency of Creative Destruction. 
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3), 
805–852. doi:10.2307/2946673
Chang, W. S., & Hsieh, J. J. (2011). Intellectual 
Capital and Value Creation- Is Innovation Capital 
a Missing Link? International Journal of Busi-
ness and Management, 6(2), 3–12. doi:10.5539/
ijbm.v6n2p3
Dayton, B. (2004). Managing Crises in the Twenty-
First Century. International Studies Review, 6(1), 
165–194. doi:10.1111/j.1521-9488.2004.393_1.x
248
The Quest for Economic Recovery
 
Diez, J. M., Ochoa, M. L., Prieto, M. B., & 
Santidrian, A. (2010). Intellectual capital 
and value creation in Spanish firms. Jour-
nal of Intellectual Capital, 11(3), 348–367. 
doi:10.1108/14691931011064581
Griffiths D. (2011). KM is dead! Long live knowl-
edge. Inside Knowledge, 14(9), 5-6.
Griffiths, D., & Moon, B. (2011). The state of 
knowledge management: A survey suggests 
ways to attain more satisfied users. KM World., 
20(10), 1–2.
Heisig, P., & Samuel, A. (2013). Road Mapping 
Future Research in Knowledge Management. 
1st International Workshop, Global Knowledge 
Survey, University of Leeds.
Hofmann, J. (2008). Disclose intangibles - ef-
fectively! Talking point. Deutsche Bank Research.
OECD. (2008). Intellectual Assets and Value 
Creation - Synthesis Report. OECD Directorate 
for Science, Technology and Industry.
Pressman, S. (2011). Microeconomics After 
Keynes: Post Keynesian Economics and Public 
Policy. American Journal of Economics and 
Sociology, 70(2), 511–539. doi:10.1111/j.1536-
7150.2011.00775.x
Pulic, A. (2000). VAIC – an accounting tool for 
IC management. International Journal of Technol-
ogy Management, 20(5-8), 702–714. doi:10.1504/
IJTM.2000.002891
Pulic, A. (2004). Intellectual capital – does it create 
or destroy value? Measuring Business Excellence, 
8(1), 62–68. doi:10.1108/13683040410524757
Rigby, D., & Bilodeau, B. (2013). Management 
Tools & Trends 2013. Bain & Company Guide.
Ruelle, D. (1981). Small random perturbations of 
dynamical systems and the definition of attractors. 
Communications in Mathematical Physics, 82(1), 
137–151. doi:10.1007/BF01206949
Santella, N., Steinberg, L., & Parks, K. (2009). 
Decision Making for Extreme Events: Modeling 
Critical Infrastructure Interdependencies to Aid 
mitigation and Response Planning. Review of 
Policy Research., 26(4), 409–422. doi:10.1111/
j.1541-1338.2009.00392.x
Seeger, M. W., Sellnow, T. L., & Ulmer, R. R. 
(1998). Communication, organization and crisis. 
Communication Yearbook., 21, 231–275.
The Knowledge Management Observatory. 
(2011). KMO Global Survey, 2011, K3.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Economic Crisis: A sustained and significant 
decline in many parts of the economic activity. 
The term economic activity encompasses macro-
economic variables such as GDP, employment, 
national output, prices, investments etc.
Intellectual Capital Reporting: The account-
ing scheme that highlights the way intellectual 
assets create value. The quantitative mapping of 
the human, relational and structural capital of an 
organization.
Intellectual Capital: The difference between 
book value and market value of a firm; the in-
tangible assets of the firm that can be used to 
increase organizational value and confer competi-
tive advantage.
Knowledge Economy: A system of consump-
tion, production and services that is based on 
knowledge operations that permeate the entire 
economic spectrum.
Knowledge Resources: The know-how, the 
expertise, the current information on a topic 
including research and the best practices used 
to support the storage, distribute and reuse of 
organizational knowledge.
Knowledge Society: A society that is based on 
the understanding that the capability for creation, 
249
The Quest for Economic Recovery
 
distribution and use of information and knowledge 
is needed to compete and succeed in the current 
economic world.
Organizational Value: Any concept, idea or 
activity that is considered by the organization as 
a procurer of added financial output.
