Regional resilience in Italy: a very long-run analysis

 Regional Resilience in Italy: A Very Long-run Analysis  
 
by 
ROBERTO CELLINI a  and GIANPIERO TORRISI b 
 
 a University of Catania, Department of Economics and Business; Catania, Italy; 
b University of Portsmouth, Economics and Finance, Portsmouth Business School; 
Portsmouth, U.K. 
 
 
 
Abstract: Resilience is a concept referring to the manner in which systems react to, and 
recover from, shocks. According to several recent analyses, ‘resilience’ can explain 
different regional economic performances. However, this study indicates that this 
explanation is quite unconvincing when applied to the Italian regions in the very long 
run (1890-2009). Only few shocks emerge to have specific impact effects differing 
across regions, while the recovery experience is ever spatially homogeneous. Hence, it 
is difficult to discern genuine differences in regional resilience. This evidence can be 
interpreted as a reason why the regional differences in Italy are huge and persistent. 
 
Keywords: Regional growth; Economic resilience; Shock impact; Recovery. 
JEL Classification: O40, R11, C32. 
 
 
 
a
 CORRESPONDING AUTHOR: 
Roberto Cellini – University of Catania, Department of Economics and Business.  
Corso Italia 55 - 95129 Catania - Italy;  
tel.: +39-095-7537728, fax: +39-095-7537710; e-mail cellini@unict.it 
 
b
 Gianpiero Torrisi - University of Portsmouth, Economics and Finance, 
Richmond Building, Portland Street, Portsmouth, Hampshire, PO1 3DE, U.K.; 
tel. +44 (0) 23928444821 e-mail Gianpiero.Torrisi@port.ac.uk 
 
 1 
 
Regional Resilience in Italy: A Very Long-run Analysis 
 
 
Abstract: Resilience is a concept derived from engineering and ecology relating to 
the way in which systems react to, and recover from, shocks. According to several 
recent analyses, different ‘resilience behaviours’ are able to explain differences in 
the economic performance of regions. This study shows that this explanation is not 
fully convincing when applied to the Italian regions, observed in the very long run. 
This analysis focuses on real per capita income levels over the period 1890-2009. 
Only few (major) shocks emerge to have a specific impact effect differing across 
the regions, while the recovery experiences never differ significantly across 
regions. Hence, it is difficult to discern genuine differences in regional resilience 
behaviour. This evidence can be interpreted as a reason why the regional 
differences in Italy are huge and persistent. 
Keywords: Regional growth; Economic resilience; Shock impact; Recovery. 
JEL Classification:O40, R11, C32. 
 
 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Resilience is a broad concept, derived from engineering and ecological sciences 
pertaining to the manner in which systems react to, and recover from, shocks. Recently, 
a renewed interest in this topic has arisen, with specific emphasis on the analysis of 
economic growth, and regional growth in particular. In broad terms, the basic idea is 
that different resilience behaviours are the reason why regions within a country show 
different economic growth performance (FINGLETONet al., 2012;MARTIN, 2012). 
 In mathematics and physics, several analyses have been developed about the 
reaction of stochastic systems to shock (see, for e.g., BATABYAL, 1999) with the 
applications to environmental and development economics (PERRINGS, 1998; LEVIN et 
al., 1998). REGGIANI et al. (2002) suggested that resilience could be a topic of spatial 
and regional political economy. Two research lines can be marked. On the one side, a 
 2 
 
line of literature has developed, within economic geography, dealing with the effect of 
‘major shocks’, like war bombing on city growth (DAVIS and WEINSTEIN, 2002; 
BOSKER et al., 2007) or severe political change (REDDING and STURM, 2008). On the 
other side, a remarkable set of articles, around 2010, has focused on regional growth 
(PENDALL et al., 2010; PIKE et al., 2010;SIMMIE and MARTIN, 2010).  
 FINGLETON et al. (2012) and MARTIN (2012) make definitely clear that 
considering resilience can provide an interesting interpretation key, for understanding 
differences across regions. In particular, FINGLETON et al (2012) proposes a very simple 
regression analysis approach, to evaluate whether regions react to, and recover from, 
shocks in different ways. Such a perspective of analysis was absent from the wide body 
of theoretical and applied regional research developed over the 1980-90s, as a by-
product of the success of endogenous growth theories (BARRO and SALA-I-MARTIN, 
1991, 1992; BERNARD and DURLAUF,  1996, QUAH, 1996; TSIONAS, 2001). 
 The present study takes the FINGLETONet al. (2012) approach as a useful 
analytical point of departure, to analyse the case of Italy. The Italian experience is an 
interesting case-study in light of the long history of Italian persistent economic dualism 
dating back to the unification process in 1861, despite many regional policies 
implemented since then. Indeed, the resilience theoretical framework –applied to Italian 
regional disparities– represents a line of research not yet explored by the copious 
literature dealing with this subject. Such an approach allows tackling the task from a 
new promising angle. Furthermore, it is worth emphasizing that it has already proven its 
ability to provide a significant contribution once applied to the UK which is 
characterised by similar (but reversed) North-South divide. 
Yet, here, some methodological changes are warranted. Specifically, annual data 
over a very long-run period of time (1890-2009) are considered, while FINGLETON et al. 
(2012) use quarterly data in a four-decade period (1971-2009). In that respect, pros and 
cons characterise the different options; however, the present very long-run perspective 
permits analysis of regional responses to “extreme” shocks (one can think of the World 
Wars, for instance), and to get insights into the characteristics of the growth and 
development process over the course of a century.  
 3 
 
Furthermore, this study departs from the exercise of FINGLETON et al. (2011), in 
terms of its accounting for resilience with regard to per capita GDP data, rather than 
employment data; pros and cons of these different options will be discussed later. 
The results from different estimation methods are provided by the present study: 
specifically, beyond SURE (Seemingly Unrelated Regression Equation) estimation (and 
the related test for parameter restrictions in order to detect differences pertaining to 
regional resilience), this study also presents a random-coefficient panel estimation to 
assess the same hypotheses with higher estimator efficiency. Nevertheless, it is found 
that the main conclusions remain robust to different estimators. Finally, evidence is 
provided about the permanent effect of a shock originating in different areas. 
 In overall terms this study suggests that the resilience story, as investigated from 
a perspective à la FINGLETON et al. (2011), does not readily offer a sound explanation 
for different economic performances across Italian regions –as long as ‘reaction to 
shocks’ and ‘recovery from shocks’ only vary in very few cases across regions. That 
said, the methodological framework offered by the FINGLETON et al. (2011) approach 
does allow the generation of some answers to a number of questions in a very simple 
and intuitive manner. In particular, informed by the results from the model estimates 
produced, the following questions, among others, can be addressed: Have regions 
answered the same shock in the same way?, Have regions recovered from the same 
shock in the same way?, Is there any difference, over time, in the way in which regions 
reacted to, and recovered from, shocks?, Which are the regions displaying the highest 
(or lowest) degree of impact resistance to recessionary shock?, Which are the regions 
displaying the best (or worst) ability to recover from recessionary shocks?, Have the 
recessionary shocks played some role in shaping regional performance?, Is there a 
relation between growth performance and the way in which regions react to- and 
recover from- shocks? This set of questions will be specifically answered in this present 
investigation. 
The homogeneity displayed by Italian regions in the impact reaction and in the 
recovery from shocks, appears as somewhat surprising, given the well-known 
heterogeneity across these regions. Some implications about the long-run pattern of 
regional income dynamics can also be discerned.   
 4 
 
 The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 sets forth the ideas behind 
the concept of economic resilience, with specific reference to regional growth, and 
makes close reference to the issues presented in FINGLETON et al. (2012) concerning the 
U.K. case. Section 3 presents the Italian data that are used in this study; in particular, 
the present study relies on a data bank recently made available by DANIELE and 
MALANIMA (2007), that is attracting substantial interest and is nourishing the debate on 
the reasons for and the roots of Italian dualism (e.g., FELICE, 2011a, 2011b; BRUNETTI et 
al. 2011). Given that the time series at hand are integrated of order 1, and co-integrating 
links emerge, this Section also discusses the meaning of ‘resilience’ in an environment 
of integrated / co-integrated time series. Section 4 presents the results concerning the 
resilience of Italian regions; in particular, the evidence of the SURE estimation à la 
FINGLETON et al. (2012) is firstly considered, along with the (more efficient) random 
coefficient model (RCM) estimation; then the evidence coming from a vector error 
correction model (VECM) estimation is presented; the exercises are also repeated, 
limiting the time sample under consideration to the most recent decades (1960-2009). 
Section 5 offers some answers to the specific research questions previously articulated 
in this Introduction. Section 6 concludes. 
 
 
2.  Economic resilience 
 
Regional resilience derives from the ideas of resilience developed in engineering, 
ecological science and, more recently, social ecology (see, respectively, HOLLING, 1996; 
HOLLING, 1973; and WALKER et al., 2006). It refers to the ability of a subject or a 
complex system to regain shape and position elastically, following a shock. The 
engineering perspective is primarily focussed on the immediate reaction of a system to 
shock and its subsequent recovery; the ecological perspective mainly focuses on how a 
shock is persistently changing the system behaviour. In social sciences and in 
economics more specifically, both of these perspectives make sense, as long as shocks 
affect the economy through their (homogenous or heterogeneous) immediate impact and 
recovery reaction and also the permanent performance in the long run. 
 5 
 
 With specific reference to regional economies, FINGLETON et al. (2012) analysed 
whether different performance in (employment) dynamics across 12 U.K. regions may 
be explained by different levels of resilience to a recessionary shock. They investigated 
whether the reaction to (the same) shock differ across regions, and the recovery from 
shock is different across regions. To this end, they previously identified recessionary 
shocks within the period of time under examination (simply, the quarters in which 
national employment exhibits a decrease), and then they evaluated whether there is any 
regional specificity in the reaction to shock and in the subsequent recovery.  
Formally, let yit denote the log of employment level in the region i in time t, with 
i=1,2 ...N and t=1,2,...T. The first difference of yit , denoted by git , measures the growth 
rate of employment. Assume to have identified the time of the recessionary shocks 
(with a total number of shocks equal to K); and associate a dummy variable Dk to each 
shock (k=1,2,..,.K); finally consider the post-recession period following each shock and 
associate a dummy variable Sk to each post-recession period (Sk takes the value 1 in 
each time of the post-recession period following the k-shock, and 0 otherwise). 
Operationally, in the FINGLETON et al. analysis, the post-recession period lasts until the 
subsequent shock, but a different choice could be made, by assuming, for instance that 
each post-recession period has a fixed duration. Thus, for any region i, FINGLETON et al. 
consider the following regression: 
 
(1)  ,(1) 1 ,(2) 2 ,( ) ,(1) 1 ,(2) 2 ,( )... ...i i i i i K K i i i K K ig D D D S S S eα β β β γ γ γ= + + + + + + + + +  
 
They consider the system of N equations as a SURE, and then compare the beta ( β ) 
and gamma ( γ ) coefficients across regions. If jikjki ,,)(,)(, ∀= ββ  , then all regions 
have the same impact reaction to  the k-th shock. Similarly if   jihjhi ,,)(,)(, ∀= γγ , then 
all regions display the same recovery effect to the h-th shock. 
Heterogeneity across the beta and/or gamma coefficients pertaining to a specific 
shock, means different resilience behaviours across regions. Specifically, FINGLETON et 
al. (2012) identify 4 shocks hitting the U.K. regions in the period 1971-2009; apart from 
the most recent shock, occurred in 2008 (for which the beta coefficients are equal across 
regions), beta coefficients differ across regions for any given shock, so that the impact 
 6 
 
reaction is found to be different across regions. On the contrary, the gamma coefficients 
generally appear to be equal across regions, for each post-recession period. Hence, 
FINGLETON et al. (2012) conclude that U.K. regions do show different resilience to 
shocks, particularly in consideration of the heterogeneity across the regional impact 
reactions.1 
The present study substantially rehearses this regression exercise but applied to 
the Italian cause. Even so, it deviates from the choices of FINGLETON et al. (2012) in a 
number of respects. In particular, this study considers data with annual frequency for a 
much longer period of time, so that it examines the behaviour of Italian regions in the 
very long run. On the one hand, the time frame of this study is more consistent with the 
interest in the long-run growth performance of regions. Moreover, cyclical components 
(not to mention the seasonal ones) are a less serious problem in annual data, as 
compared to quarterly data. However, on the other hand, the consideration of a very 
long period of time requires caution and check about structural stability.  
Furthermore, data on income per capita are considered rather than employment. 
Thus there are good reasons for either choice. FINGLETON et al. argue that much of the 
impact of a recession is borne by the labour market, and declines in employment, after 
recessionary shock, are larger than decline in output; thus, the issue of regional 
resilience assumes particular relevance in relation to how regional labour markets are 
affected by and recover from shock. With respect to the Italian experience, where labour 
markets are more rigid as compared to the U.K. case, the focus on GDP appears to be 
more appropriate, precisely because the reaction of labour markets are deemed to be less 
variable across regions, due to institutional rigidities.  
FINGLETON et al. (2012) find that the U.K. regions do differ when it comes to the 
impact reaction to shock (with the exception of the recent 2008/09 shock episode), 
while the regional behaviours do not differ in the recovery phase. However, in overall 
terms, they conclude that the different impact reaction to common shocks allows the 
argument to be made that different resilience behaviour in labour markets is a relevant 
factor in the economic experience of U.K. regions. 
From a theoretical perspective it is worth stressing that such an approach allows 
to explore “the ability of a regional economy to maintain a pre-existing state (typically 
assumed to be an equilibrium state) in the presence of some type of exogenous shock” 
 7 
 
and the “extent to which a regional or national economy that has experienced an 
external shock is able to return to its previous level and/or growth rate of output” (HILL 
et al., 2008). 
 Although it has important limitations in capturing and explaining “the 
geographical diversity, variety and unevenness of resilience” (PIKE et al., 2010 ) 
especially in terms “of  what kind of resilience and for whom” (PIKE et al., 2010), to the 
case at hand, and with the Italian spatial divide on the background, this approach has the 
potential to deliver a significant contribution to the still active debate on the relative 
performance of regions. Put differently, following HILL et al. (2008), this approach to 
resilience assumes that the regional performance can be characterised by multiple 
equilibria “not all of which are efficient (in a static and/or dynamic sense)”. The  
homogeneous reaction to shocks, therefore, can be interpreted as evidence of the 
inability of regions to “avoid becoming locked-into such a low-level equilibrium or, if 
in one, to transition quickly to a ‘better’ equilibrium” (HILL et al., 2008) 
 
 
3.  Italian data: Regional per capita GDP in the very long run 
 
This analysis uses a time series of real per capita GDP computed by DANIELE and 
MALANIMA (2007) for the Italian regions over the period 1890-2009.2 Even if the 
current Italian regions are 20 (at the NUTS II level), DANIELE and MALANIMA’s data are 
articulated into 16 regions, as long as 4 regions were created after the II World War.3 
The DANIELE and MALANIMA databank is the only available databank with annual 
observations related to regional accounting for such a long period of time for Italy.  
 The contribution of DANIELE and MALANIMA is part of a lively research line, 
aiming at reconstructing regional data for Italy. The databank has generated an 
interesting debate among economic historians. The more contested issues do not 
concern the methodological choices of DANIELE and MALANIMA, nor the original 
sources, which can be considered as generally correct (or, at least, ‘necessary’),4 but 
rather the resulting general picture. The comparison of specific point data of this 
databank with different databanks provides evidence of its substantial correctness and 
reliability, but also offers hints for further interesting debates in economic history, as 
 8 
 
some surprises emerge in relation to the consolidated wisdom. For instance, the 
distribution of income across regions at the beginning of the time span under 
consideration is less dispersed as represented in other databanks (see, on this point e.g., 
FELICE, 2011b, p. 21; MALANIMA and ZAMAGNI, 2011); again, the reconstruction of 
DANIELE and MALANIMA provides a more modest economic performance of Italy 
during the Fascist period, as compared to the acquired wisdom, and sharply increasing 
regional disparities.  
 
Insert about here: 
Figure 1.(a),(b),(c).- Log of income per capita 
Figure 2.- The annual growth rate of income per capita in Italy 
 
Figure 1 shows the plot of the log of (real, per capita) GDP time series for: (a) Italy at 
the national level, (b) the 16 Italian regions, (c) Italy and the two richest and poorest 
regions (as evaluated at the outset of the period, which correspond to the average level; 
namely Liguria and Lombardia  near the top, and Calabria and Sicily near the bottom). 
Figure 2 shows the plot of the first difference, that is the growth rate of real per capita 
GDP, for the national series. Table 1 provides some descriptive statistics on the time 
series, while Table 2 provides evidence concerning the test of integration / co-
integration among the time series at hand. In particular: 
- Time series of per capita GDP at the regional level, and the series at the national 
level, are integrated of order 1 (Table 2.I). 
- If the 16 regional series are considered, co-integration with rank equal to 15 
cannot be rejected; if 17 time series (namely, the 16 regional series and the 
national one) are considered, co-integration with rank equal to 16 cannot be 
rejected (Table 2.III). 
The above pieces of evidence suggest that only one unit root enter the national and 
regional series (as clearly supported also by the group unit root test reported in Table 
2.II). This issue is only partially different from previous results concerning Italian 
regions (over shorter periods of time), which detected a somewhat larger number of 
distinct unit root (see, e.g., CELLINI and SCORCU, 1997, D’AMATO and PISTORESI, 1997; 
DE SIANO and D’UVA, 2008).Under this view, one could affirm that the longer time 
span under consideration permits to get the unique unit-root driving all regional series. 
However, whatever the time span under consideration, the substance of evidence is 
 9 
 
similar: long-run relationships between regional (and national) per capita GDP are 
operative in the long run, admittedly with possible different intensity or with breaks. 
 Moreover,  
- The correlation between any regional series (of real per capita GDP levels) on 
the one side, and the national series on the other is larger than 0.986 in any case. 
- The pair-wise correlation between the regional series (of real per capita GDP 
levels) are larger than 0.957 in any case. 
That is, there is a very large degree of correlation in levels among the series. More 
surprisingly, an analogous degree of correlation emerges as concerns the series of 
growth rates:  
- The correlation between any regional series (of real per capita GDP levels) on 
the one side, and the national series on the other is larger than 0.878 in any case. 
- The pairwise correlation between the regional series (the growth rate of real per 
capita GDP levels) are larger than 0.772 in any case. 
 
Insert about here: 
Table 1. - Descriptive statistics on time series, Italy and the regions 
Table 2. - Results of integration and co-integration of regional time series 
 
These pieces of evidence provide support in considering the first difference of (log) 
GDP in the analysis that follows: this study considers that regional time series are 
integrated of order 1, with the presence of long-run links –as documented by a large 
body of available research (see DE SIANO and D’UVA, 2008, and the references therein), 
and consistent with the evidence here provided in Table 2. The main interest in the 
present analysis is in evaluating whether different resilience behaviours play some role, 
firstly, in shaping the short-run dynamics –and for this reason it makes sense to focus on 
the series in first-difference; secondly, in analysing whether resilience can be considered 
responsible for the different growth performance of regions; considerations on the level 
of time series will be left for a final stage of the analysis. 
 
 
 10 
 
4.  Results on regional economic resilience  
 
 
4.1  Indentifying recessionary shocks 
Following FINGLETON et al. (2012), the present study identifies the years in which the 
national GDP growth rate is negative as years of ‘recessionary shocks’. More 
specifically, the present study considers recessionary shocks the years in which a 
decrease (of per capita income, in this case) larger than 0.1% occurs; moreover, the 
recessionary shocks occurring in subsequent years are consolidated in one shock. As a 
consequence, the following 14 recessionary shocks are detected on the Italian data, over 
the 118-year period under examination: 1892, 1910, 1914/15 (considered as one shock), 
1920/21, 1926, 1929, 1931, 1933/34, 1940/41/42, 1944/45, 1975, 1993, 2003, 2008/09. 
As it is immediately obvious from a look at the data, the size of these shocks is 
different.  
 As to the identification of the ‘post-recession (recovery) period’, the study 
identifies the period of at least three years, following a shock, without the occurrence of 
a further recessionary shock. In sum, there are eight ‘post-recession’ periods: the post 
recession period following the shock of 1892; the one following the 1910 shock, the one 
following the 1914/15 shock, the one after the 1920/21 shock, the one after the 1929-
1931-1933/34 shocks, and the ones after the 1944/45 shock, the 1973 shock, and the 
1993 shock (the years following the 2003 shock are characterised by the fact that 2005 
shows a negative growth rate, even if smaller than 0.1% in absolute value, so that no 
positive recovery follows this shock); 2008/09 are identified as a further recessionary 
shocks, but of course, there are no data, at the present moment, to consider the recovery 
from the 2008/09 shock). Some words have to be spent about the length of post-
recession period. FINGLETON et al. (2011) consider the post-recession recovery lasting 
until the subsequent shock; such a choice would have implied, in the series under 
consideration in the present study, that, e.g., the post 1944/45 shock recovery covers the 
thirty year period until 1974; or the recovery post oil shock in 1975 lasts until 1993. It is 
hard to define as ‘post-shock recovery’ a period lasting 18 or 30 years! For this reason, 
the present study reports the results pertaining to recovery periods of a fixed length, 
namely three years. Thus, the recovery period after the 1892 shocks covers the years 
 11 
 
1893 to 95, the recovery from the 1910 shock covers the period 1911 to 1913, and so 
on. Nevertheless, the key results are robust to this different choice concerning the 
duration of the recovery periods (of fixed length equal to three years, or during until the 
subsequent shock takes place), in nearly all instances (the two cases in which slightly 
different results emerge are noted in Table 3).  
 
Insert about here: 
Table 3. - Qualitative results in SURE estimation (general specification) 
 
4.2  Economic resilience to shocks: impact and recovery 
The present analysis starts by considering a regression equation in the form of eq. (1); 
specifically, it considers the growth rate of per-capita GDP in each of the 16 Italian 
regions. All series are stationary. For each region this growth rate is regressed against a 
constant term (which is intended to capture the autonomous regional growth), a set of 
14 dummy variables in correspondence to the detected shocks, and a set of 8 dummy 
variables in correspondence to the detected post-recession periods. The 16 equations are 
estimated as a system of seemingly unrelated regression equations (SURE). It is worth 
underlining that this specification perfectly mimics the regression design of FINGLETON 
et al. (2012, eq. (1)) whose results are in their Table 3. 
 Verbally, the alpha coefficients capture the “autonomous growth”, conditional 
on the reaction to- and recover from- shocks; the beta coefficients capture the specificity 
of the impact effect of a recessionary shock, upon the regional GDP growth rate; the 
gamma coefficients capture the effect –if any– of recovery after shock. 
 Considering the system estimation, the present interest is in evaluating whether 
for each shock the beta coefficients are equal across regions: in such a case, there is no 
“regional specificity” as concerns the impact and ‘recovery’ effect of the shock. 
Furthermore, if the restriction of equality among coefficients is accepted, the analysis 
evaluates whether the common coefficient is equal to zero or not: if equal to zero, there 
is no specific effect of that shock; if it is different from zero, the effect of the shock is 
significant and equal across regions. 
 Table 3 reports the qualitative results of the starting, general specification which 
takes into consideration 14 shocks and 8 periods of recovery. The results are a little bit 
surprising, in the sense that several beta and gamma coefficients are statistically 
 12 
 
insignificant. More specifically, in 8 out of the 14 considered shock cases, the beta 
coefficients appear to be equal to zero (both if considered as individual coefficients, on 
the basis of the t-statistics, and if considered jointly, on the basis of an appropriate F 
test): this means that each of these 8 shocks do not exhibit any significant effect on the 
growth rate of regional GDP. As to the 6 remaining cases, the response of regional 
growth rate to the shocks occurring in 1920/21, 1929, and 1944/45 appears to be 
statistically significant but equal across regions, according to an appropriate restriction 
F-test; the impact reactions to the shocks occurring in 1914/15, in 1975 and in 1973 
appear to be different across regions (and statistically significant). 
 A similar surprising result emerges with respect to the significance of the 
recovery dummy variables: the coefficients for post-1982, post-1910, post-1920/21, 
post-33/34 dummies are equal across regions, and equal to zero (both if considered as 
individual coefficients in each specific regression equation, and if considered jointly). In 
the case of post-1914/15, gamma coefficients are statistically significant and equal 
across regions. Only the post-1944/45 and post-1975 recovery period present dummy 
variables that are different across regions: more precisely, the test on equality of gamma 
coefficients rejects the null of equality.  
 As a consequence of these issues, the authors of the present study decided to 
focus on a regression equation, which retains only a selected group of 6 shocks –called 
‘major’ shocks– and specifically, the shock episodes are retained which show statistical 
significance for the impact or the recovery dummy variable. Thus, the final regression 
design considers the following equation :   
 
 (2)  ikk kikk kiii uSDg +++= ∑∑ ==
6
1 )(
6
1 )( γβα  
with: 
k=1: 1914/15 shock (and relative recovery);  
k=2: 1920/21 shock (and relative recovery); 
k=3: 1929 shock (and relative recovery); 
k=4: 1944/45 shock (and relative recovery); 
k=5: 1975 shock (and relative recovery); 
k=6: 1993 shock (and relative recovery). 
 
 13 
 
 It is important to emphasize that the distinction between ‘major’ shocks (as 
listed above) and other shocks has been left to data, without any discretionary 
intervention beyond the general (soft) criterion followed, that is, the significance of at 
least one of the dummy variables associated to the impact or the recovery. This list of 
major shocks in itself is interesting to comment. A very limited number of recessionary 
shocks appear to have significant specific effect on regional GDP dynamics: just six 
episodes over nearly 120 years, included two shocks related to the World Wars.5 
 It is worth pointing out how these results are consistent with the argument that 
wars – as a shock– could be very different from other types of shocks (BOSKER et al., 
2007, BOSKER et al., 2008). A war shock is potentially able to heavily influence the 
performance in the long-run; usually, after the war, economies follow a very different 
path, and resilience to war shocks can have a very different nature. The empirical 
evidence represented by the ‘Wirtschaftswunder’ in Germany is an important example 
corroborating the above argument. The same can be said for Italy: a period of thirty 
years of economic growth (‘Miracolo economico’) followed the II World War. 
Moreover, in the case at hand it is immediate to note that the magnitude of parameters 
associated with the post-1944/45 recovery (ranging from 0.12, Umbria datum, to 0.141, 
Lombardy datum) is substantially higher than those relative to all remaining recovery 
periods regardless of their statistical significance.       
Consider also that some shocks, among the six major selected ones, have 
displayed a significant effect as far as the dummy variables are concerned, which is 
equal across regions, so that it is not possible to affirm that different regions have 
displayed different impact reaction or recovery.  
 Table 4 reports the results concerning the regression specification (2), with only 
the six major shocks considered; equations are estimated as a SURE system. All alpha 
coefficients, capturing the autonomous growth rate, are significant and included in the 
interval 2.0-2.7%.6 Not surprisingly, beta coefficients are generally negative and 
significant: in only two cases they are positive, but are not statistically significant, even 
at the 10% level; the cases in which beta coefficient is negative, but not significant, 
include all regional coefficients pertaining to the 1993 shock. The gamma coefficients 
are generally positive, as expected (in most instances, however, they are not statistically 
significant); if negative, they are not statistically significant.  
 14 
 
 
Insert about here: 
Table 4. - Results from the SURE corresponding to eq. (2) 
 
Insert about here: 
Table 4. - Results from the SURE corresponding to eq. (2) 
 
However, the SURE estimation of the set of regression equations (2) could be 
inefficient as compared to a proper panel data estimation (SINGH and ULLAH, 1974). 
Keeping in mind the final goal of evaluating regional specificities in facing common 
shocks, therefore, the authors of the present study suggest considering the following 
model:  
 
(3) 
6 6
( ) ( )1 1
0
( ) 0( ) ( )
( ) 0( ) ( )
i i i k k i k k ik k
i i
i k k i k
i k k i k
g D S uα β γ
α α ε
β β ζ
γ γ τ
= =
= + + +
= +
= +
= +
∑ ∑
 
 
where ig , kD , and kS maintain the same meaning that they have in equation (1) while 
respective coefficients are composed by both a deterministic and a random part; 
deterministic parts are denoted by 000 ,, γβα , while random parts are denoted by 
iε , )(kiζ  and )(kiτ with i=1,2,...16. 
The analysis is performed using the Random Coefficient Method (RCM). From 
a methodological perspective RCM represents an expansion (CASETTI, 1986) of model 
(1), openly accounting for potential heterogeneity across subjects –in this case, across 
regions (see also FOSTER, 1991, for a discussion about the pros of RCM regression 
analysis in the field of economic geography). Specifically, RCM allows to test zero 
restrictions on iε , )(kiζ  and )(kiτ :7 therefore, in order to test for heterogeneity in the 
regional resilience according to the RCM framework, the null hypothesis that the 
random part of the parameters is zero has been tested.8 Furthermore, in order to 
overcome technical limitations related to the more-than-one random parameter 
estimation,9 in lieu of estimating a model with random alpha coefficients, a dummy 
variable is inserted for each region performing the LR test only on the beta and gamma 
 15 
 
coefficients. Finally, in line with the precise objective to further improve the estimation 
efficiency, only the estimates which reports statistically significant coefficients are 
considered. Results are reported in Table 5.  
 
Insert about here: 
Table 5. - Results from Random Coefficient estimation 
 
RCM results substantially confirm the story, as told by SURE estimates, with 
few minor discrepancies. Indeed, as far as the impact (random) coefficients are 
concerned, only in 1 out of the 3 shocks for which SURE rejects the null of equality at 
the 5% significance level (1914/15, 1975 and 1993), regional economies appear to be 
affected differently, according to the RCM estimation –namely, the 1914/15 shock. 
During the remaining recessionary episodes, RCM estimates suggest that shocks 
impacted all 16 regions considered with equal vividness. Furthermore, as to the three-
year recovery periods, RCM results are entirely consistent with SURE estimates, 
accepting the null of equality between coefficients for all recovery periods considered, 
and the statistical insignificance of coefficients in most cases. Roughly speaking, the 
RCM estimation suggests that the degree of heterogeneity across regions is even more 
limited, as compared to what emerges from the SURE estimation. Although a more 
efficient panel approach allows to refine the interpretation of the resilience story as 
applied here to the Italian regional case-study, the main findings obtained using a SURE 
approach rest unchanged, indicating that the origins of Italian regional differences and 
consequent dualism, could not be explained in terms of differences in the impact and/or 
recovery behaviour of regional economies.    
 Lastly, a few words have to be spent about the equation structural stability. 
Given the regression design at hand, it is pointless to investigate whether the 
explanatory dummy variables have a force which moves over time. Then again, it is far 
from being surprising that a specific constant term covering the years after the II World 
War would emerge to be positive and significant, provided that the economic growth in 
these years is higher than over the previous decades. However, the consideration of such 
a structural break would not alter the substance of the answers concerning the regional 
coefficients of shock impact and recovery variables: sign, significance and especially 
 16 
 
the test results about coefficient equality across regions remain robust after controlling 
for such a break in the constant term.10  
 One more point is worth to be made: the reconstruction of data before the II 
World War is based on few original data points; missing data are obtained by linear 
interpolation, assuming that the effect of sectoral shocks across regions are symmetric 
(while the different sectoral composition of regions is properly taken into account) – see 
fn 5 and the Appendix of DANIELE and MALANIMA (2007) for further details. Hence, 
one could suspect that the limited heterogeneity in resilience behaviour across regions 
could derive from the data re-construction. This may impose some measure of 
symmetry. To assess this possibility, the exercise is repeated, by confining the attention 
to the sub-sample 1960-2009: the following Subsection provides evidence that the final 
result of limited regional heterogeneity is confirmed, even for the most recent sub-
sample, for which the issue of data reliability is not under discussion.    
 
4.3 Focus on the 1960-2009 sub-sample 
A regression equation like (2) is run over the period 1960-2009, considering the 20 
Italian regions that were operative in this period. All data are original from ISTAT, the 
Italian Statistic Office. The years in which recessionary shocks occurred are: 1975, 
1993, 2003, 2008/09 (a contraction also occurred in 2005, but its absolute size is smaller 
than 0.1%); three 3-year recovery periods are considerable: the ones following the 1975, 
the 1993 and the 2003 shock. 
 The upshot of the SURE estimation can be summarised as follows.  Each of the 
autonomous growth coefficients is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level, 
and equality among these coefficients is rejected (p=0.0267). As to the coefficient of the 
dummy variable pertaining the impact effect of the 1975 shock,  in 12 out of 20 regions, 
it is statistically significant; consistently, the equality of these coefficients is not 
accepted by the appropriate test (p=0.000). The impact effect of the 1993 shock is 
statistically significant in 7 out of 20 cases, but the equality of these coefficients is 
accepted at the 5% significance level (p=0.0967); however, the joint restriction to zero 
is rejected (p=0.000). The impact effect of the 2003 shock is significant in only 2 
regions: not surprisingly, the tests lead to accept the equality of these coefficients 
(p=0.864), and also the joint restriction to zero (p=0.382). The impact effect of the 
 17 
 
2008/09 shock is significant in 18 out of 20 regions, and the constraint of equality 
across these coefficients is rejected. As to the dummy variables pertaining the recovery, 
for each of the three instances,  tests lead to accept the null that coefficients are equal 
across regions, at the 95% confidence level (some doubts could be cast for the post-
1975 recovery, whose test on coefficient equality provides p=0.0546, and the joint 
restriction to zero is accepted with p= 0.0578). In words, the Italian regions, over the 
last forty years, when original regional data are available, show heterogeneous impact 
reactions to recessionary shock, in only a subset of recessionary episodes, while the 
recovery experience never emerges to differ across regions. The (more efficient) RCM 
estimation provides only slightly different results: significant shock-specific coefficients 
emerge as to the impact reaction, for all recessionary shock episodes, while the recovery 
dummies emerge to be neither significantly positive nor statistically different across 
regions. 
 In essence, a clear-cut conclusion emerges: even over the 1960-2009 period, the 
regional reaction to recessionary shocks, and especially the recovery from that shocks, 
does not seem to display sufficient heterogeneity to explain the vast differences of 
economic performance across the Italian regions: the same conclusion obtained for the 
whole period of more than a century, holds for the sub-period for which fully reliable 
and original data are available. Therefore, it would be wrong to say that the scanty 
heterogeneity in the resilience behaviour of Italian regions in the very long-run is an 
outcome of data re-construction.  
 
4.4 Evidence on the impulse responses 
Here, the fact that the shocks have a permanent effect (that is, series are integrated of 
order 1) is explicitly taken into account. Following FINGLETON et al. (2012, Section 5), 
once tested for the non-stationary I(1) nature of the processes, for the number of lags 
imposed (1), and for the number of cointegrating vectors (1), a VECM, is estimated and 
the OIRFs (orthogonalized impulse responses functions) are analysed: such functions 
quantify the responses over time in all the endogenous variables to (one standard error) 
negative shock to one specific variable, everything else equal. This FINGLETON et al. 
The procedure is applied to the data at hand, combining the Italian regions into 5 macro-
areas: Northwest, Northeast, Centre, South, Islands. Then, the graphical analysis is 
 18 
 
provided, to evaluate how a shock originated in a given area affects the dynamics (of 
real income per capita)  in the same and in the other areas – see Figure 3; in particular, 
graphs (a) and (c) correspond to Fig. 8-11 and 12 of FINGLETON et al.: graph (a) report 
how a shock originated in the relatively wealthier Northwest area affects the dynamics 
of all areas, and graph (c) reports how the relatively poorer Southern macro-area is 
affected by its own shock and by shocks originating in remaining  areas. Finally, the 
graph (b) reports the effect that a shock in each of the 5 areas has in the same area. 
 
Insert about here: 
Figure 3.(a),(b),(c).- Impulse response functions (from VECM estimation, 1890-2009) 
 
 
The comparative analysis of the whole set of impulse response functions permits to 
observe that: (a)the effect of a shock originated in any given area is the largest in the 
same area; (b) the Northwest is the area where its own recessionary shocks have the 
largest (impact and cumulated) effect; (c) South and islands are the areas where shocks 
originating elsewhere have the smallest effect. 
 Hence, the impulse response function analysis, explicitly taking into account the 
permanent effect of shocks (consistent with the I(1) nature of the series in log levels) 
leads to see that Italian areas show differences, as far as the effects of shocks are 
concerned, like in FINGLETON et al. (2012) analysis; at the same time, the point of the 
heterogeneity across areas appears to be quantitatively small, to explain the large and 
permanent differences of economic performance of Italian regions. The results from this 
part of the analysis are not at odds with the evidence of the previous Sections: the 
impulse response analysis takes into account all the shocks hitting the regions every 
year, whereas the first part of the analysis focuses solely on the specificity of the 
‘major’ recessionary shocks. What the two parts of the analysis say is that shocks have 
permanent effects, and the permanent effects of shocks are different across areas, but 
there is limited heterogeneity in the ways in which different regions react and recover 
from common ‘major’ recessionary shocks. 
 
 
 19 
 
5.  Performance of Italian regions 
 
On the basis of statistical description of data, and the results of the present estimation 
exercises, one can provide clear-cut answers to specific questions concerning the 
regional growth performance in Italy over the very long run. In what follows, comments 
are developed with reference to the estimation over the whole time sample (1890-2009), 
if not differently stated. 
 
1. Is the growth performance of Italian regions homogenous? 
The income levels across regions differ significantly, as is well known and confirmed 
by formal test also on the data in the databank at hand; for example, an ANOVA F test 
for equality of the mean level across the 16 Italian regions, rejects the null of equality: 
F15,1888=11.067, p=0.000. The issue about the growth rates is a little bit more involved: 
indeed, an ANOVA F test would not reject the equality across the mean values of the 
growth rates across regions (F15,1872=0.131, p=1.000).11 However, a formal test for 
equality of alpha coefficients in the regression equation (2) rejects the null of equality. 
This implies that the autonomous growth rates differ across regions, after having 
controlled for the effect of shocks and recoveries from shock. Put differently, the 
consideration of the occurrence of shocks and post-shock recovery leads to say that 
regions differ as far as the “autonomous” growth rate is concerned, while in the absence 
of the explicit consideration of recessionary shock, the growth rates would appear equal 
across regions (as documented by the ANOVA F test). Provocatively, recessionary 
shocks give a contribution to the equality, instead of inequality, of the regional growth 
rates in Italy. 
 
2. How many recessionary shocks have significant effect on the regional GDP 
dynamics? 
Per capita GDP levels of regions are integrated series: shocks, hitting any region in any 
year, have permanent effects. However, a very limited number of recessionary shocks 
have emerged to deliver a significant specific effect on the growth rate of regions, or to 
have a significant effect during the period of recovery following it. On the basis of 
 20 
 
statistical significance of dummy variable, only six significant shocks over a 120 year 
period can be found. 
 
 
3. Accept all major shocks the same effect on any given area? 
No, the six considered shocks have different impact effects on any region. This result 
derives from a series of formal test of the null hypotheses )6(,)2(,)1(, ... iii βββ ===  for 
each i-th region, i=1,2,…16. The result is comprehensible, provided that each shock has 
specific source, characteristic, intensity, and so on. 
 
4. Has any single major shock a similar or different impact effect on the Italian 
regions? 
According to the SURE estimation, only three shocks appear to have a different impact 
effect across regions: the 1914/15 shock, the 1975 shock, and the 1993 shock. The 
1920/21, 1929 and 1944/45 shock have significant impact upon the regions, but the 
appropriate test cannot reject that the effect is equal across regions. The degree of 
heterogeneity across regions, as their impact reaction to common shock is concerned, 
appears to be even more limited according to the RCM estimator: basing on such 
estimator, the homogeneity across regions can be rejected only for the 1914/15 shock. 
From an econometric point of view, the RCM estimator has to be judged as more 
efficient. The substantial conclusion, however is quite robust: regional differences in 
reaction to common shock are the exception rather than the rule.    
 
5. Is the recovery from any single shock equal or heterogeneous across regions?  
In all cases, the recovery effect from any single shock is equal across regions. This 
result is robust to the consideration of different length of recovery periods, and to 
different estimators. (By the way, an analogous result, to this respect, emerges in 
FINGLETON et al (2012) as concerns the employment in the U.K. regions over the last 
40 years). In most cases (namely, the recovery periods starting in 1922, 1930, 1976 
and 1994), the recovery period dummy variables present coefficients that are not only 
equal among regions, but also equal to zero, indicating that there is no ‘statistically 
relevant’ difference in the recovery years after the shock. 
 21 
 
 
6. Can the story of different resilience behaviour across the Italian regions 
represent a sound explanation of the persistent difference in their growth 
performance? 
The answer to this question has to be ‘no’, at least according to the interpretation of the 
authors of the present study: evidence is provided here that no more than three shocks 
(in a period of about 120 years) have had a different impact effect on GDP growth rates 
across regions; the three cases reduce to one if one refers to RCM rather than SURE 
estimation. In no cases, differences emerge as far as the recovery from the shocks is 
concerned. Hence, it appears that the story of resilience –though conceptually intriguing 
and worth analyzing– is unable to provide a clear account of the persistent differential 
of growth performances across the Italian regions. Of course, the reason of why 
persistent differences across regions remain over the centuries remain open and it is 
beyond the end of the present article. 
 
7. Which are the best (worst) Italian regions, as far as the economic performance 
is concerned, according to the following criteria: (i) income level, (ii) growth 
rate, (iii) ability to determine the impact of recessionary shock, (iv) the recovery 
from shocks, (v) the autonomous growth rate (i.e., the growth rate conditional on 
the shock impact and recovery effects)? 
Understandably, the resilience story can shed new light on these long-debated issues, 
only as concerns the analysis perspective (iii), (iv) and (v). However, prior to deal with 
such perspectives, it is worth remarking that: 
- The three regions with the highest GDP average level are: Liguria, Lombardia 
and Piemonte (the three highest GDP levels of the first decade of the period under 
examination, 1891-1900, pertain to Lazio, Liguria and Lombardia; the three highest 
peaksin the final decade,2000-09, pertain to Lombardia, Emilia-R., Lazio). At the 
opposite end of the list, the three regions with the lowest GDP average level 
areCalabria, Basilicata and Sicilia (the three lowest GDP levels at the beginning of the 
periodpertain to Calabria, Abruzzo and Basilicata; the three lowest scores at the end of 
the periodpertain to Campania, Calabria and Puglia). Thus, a substantial degree of 
stability characterizes the distribution of regional income levels. 
 22 
 
- Over the whole sample under consideration, the three regions with the highest 
average value of annual growth rate are Veneto, Emilia-R. and Lombardia, while the 
three regions with the lowest growth rates are Campania, Puglia, Sicilia. 
 To answer point (iii) consider the results of the regression equation (2) and look 
at the size of beta coefficients; in particular: 
- To assess the general ability of regions to resist to the impact effect of shocks, it 
makes sense to view the ‘average’ level of their beta coefficients. If a simple average of 
beta coefficients for each region is computed, the regions showing the smallest negative 
impact effect emerges to be Sardegna, Umbria and Basilicata; here it is of interest to 
note that Sardegna is an island, whose economic dynamics are quite unrelated to 
national industrial shocks, while Umbria and Basilicata are small regions: adverse 
shocks have the most limited negative impact in these areas. At the opposite end of the 
list,  the regions with the highest negative impact effect are Liguria, Lazio and Abruzzo 
(which are the worst performers as the impact reaction to shock is concerned). 
- To answer point (iv) one can look at the gamma coefficients and compute the 
simple average of gamma coefficients pertaining to each region; it is necessary, 
however, to recall that coefficients are not statistically different across regions, so that 
the present conclusion is simply a ‘numerical curiosity’ without statistical significance 
support. Anyway, the best recovery performances appear to pertain to Liguria, Piemonte 
and Lombardia, while the worst ones belong to Calabria, Basilicata and Sicilia.12 
- As to the autonomous growth (alpha coefficients), that is, the growth 
performance after having controlled for the effects of major shocks, the highest values 
pertain to Veneto, Marche, Abruzzo, while the lower ones belong to Puglia, Campania, 
Sicilia. 
 All these elements of information are reported in Table 6, which represents –in 
terms of a competitive sport analogy– a list for the ‘best’ and ‘worst’ Italian regions, in 
terms of ranking of economic performance. 
 
Insert about here: 
Table 6.  - Ranking list of Italian regions‘ economic performance 
 
 23 
 
8. Is there a relation between the way in which regions react to- and recover 
from- shocks? Is there a relation between  resilience behaviour and general 
growth performance? 
It could be interesting to note that Liguria is the worst performer according to the 
impact effect of shocks, but the best performer according to the recovery ability; 
Basilicata is among the best performers as far as the impact reaction is concerned, but 
among the worst according to the ability to recover. Nevertheless, this negative trade-off 
between impact and recovery abilities is far from being the rule: Sicily shows a bad 
performance according to both the impact and the recovery reaction, while Umbria is a 
good (or very good) performer along both directions, just to mention two opposite faces. 
Moreover, at first glance, no clear-cut relations emerge between the regional resilience 
behaviour and the general economic performance. The same conclusion is supported by 
a simple (and admittedly rough) cross-regional rank correlation analysis between the 
performance growth, as measured by the average of annual growth rate of per capita 
GDP, on the one side, and the individual regional coefficients related to resilience on 
the other side: the cross-regional rank correlation between the average value of per 
capita GDP growth rate and the average value of beta coefficients is +0.152 (while it 
should be negative, if one believes that a better impact reaction associates with a better 
growth performance); the cross-regional rank correlation between the average value of 
the annual growth rate of GDP and the average value of gamma coefficients is +0.402: 
it is positive, as expected on the basis of the guess that a better ability to recover 
associates with a better growth performance; however, the size of the rank correlation 
coefficient is rather limited to be a signal of a strong association. The picture is a little 
bit different if the association is considered between the resilience coefficients and the 
income levels: the rank correlation between the average value of per capita  income and 
the average value of beta coefficients is equal to -0.270 (which means that a “better” 
impact reaction to recessionary shock is associated with a higher average income level), 
while the rank correlation between the average level of per capita income and the 
average gamma coefficients is equal to +0.930 (or +0.739 if one takes only significant  
coefficients into consideration): this rank correlation coefficient, in fact, may denote a 
significant association between the income levels and the ability to recover from 
recessionary shock, as captured by the gamma coefficients in the regression 
 24 
 
specifications at hand. Needless to say, the evaluation of these rank correlations is far 
from being a rigorous analysis. Furthermore, the rank correlation coefficients cannot tell 
anything about causal links.  
 
 
6.  Concluding remarks 
 
This article has evaluated the economic resilience of Italian regions, that is, the regional 
behaviour in reacting to shock and in recovering from shock. This study has followed a 
well established procedure in this (relatively new) research line, especially as concerns 
the regression analysis design. At the same time, some innovative elements have been 
introduced; they are worth mentioning: the very long run analysis perspective –the 
databank under consideration covers about 120 years; the consideration of per capita 
GDP instead of employment; the efficiency check through proper panel data estimation. 
Indeed, this study has documented that shocks have permanent effects and such effects 
differ across areas, but there is limited heterogeneity in the way in which different 
regions react to and recover from major, common, recessionary shocks. Specifically, a 
very limited number of significantly heterogeneous impact effects have been counted: 
three cases, or just one case, according to different estimators, over a period longer than 
a century. Moreover, no regional significant specificities have emerged as far as the 
recovery from shock is concerned. These pieces of evidence are quite surprising, 
provided that huge differences characterize Italian regions, and their long-run economic 
performances.  
From a theoretical perspective it is worth emphasizing that the adopted approach 
to resilience allows to explore to what extent a regional economy is able to sustain a 
pre-existing state (typically assumed to be an equilibrium state) absorbing an exogenous 
shock. This approach is based on the assumption that regional performance is 
characterised by multiple equilibria, not all efficient statically and/or dynamically; 
according to this framework, therefore, homogeneous reaction to shocks, can be 
understood as the inability of regions to quickly switch from a low-level equilibrium to 
a better (more efficient) one as a result of a shock.  
 25 
 
Admittedly, this approach has important limitations in both capturing the uneven 
geographical nature of resilience, and explaining the reasons; nevertheless, it is 
potentially able to give insight on the spatial divide. In particular, from the present 
analysis the conclusion can be drawn that differences in economic resilience behaviours 
are not able to explain the different economic performance of Italian regions with a 
convincing interpretation. On the other hand, the absence of different resilience 
behaviours across regions can be distinguished as a reason why differences across 
regions are so vast and persistent in Italy.  
Of course, the reasons for these persistent differences in economic performance 
across the Italian regions remain a fascinating issue that extends beyond the scope of the 
present study. Nonetheless, the analysis hitherto developed provides insights able to 
influence the research agenda both in terms of adaptation and adaptability. Indeed, it is 
worth further exploring the causes of the observed ‘lock-in’ reproducing similar 
scenarios across regions in the long-run, while not ignoring, in an interdisciplinary 
perspective, its qualitative dimensions looking also at the interaction between agents, 
mechanisms, and sites. It can be of interest, for instance, to understand to which specific 
economic, social and/or institutional variables the resilience behaviour of regions is 
mainly linked. Without a doubt, a deeper knowledge of these aspects, in a future 
research agenda, could be crucial in designing and implementing more effective spatial 
policies. 
 
Acknowledgements. Although the authors alone are responsible for what is written 
here, thanks go to Vittorio Daniele and Emanuele Felice for useful discussion on data 
construction and their interpretation, as well as for having made available data in 
electronic format. Thanks go also to Alan Collins and Tiziana Cuccia for helpful 
comments, and especially to Prof. Ron Martin for his kind cooperation. The authors 
have also benefitted from comments from the audience at different seminars and 
conferences. Last but not least, criticisms and suggestions from two anonymous referees 
and the Editor have been very useful in improving the article.   
 
 
 26 
 
REFERENCES 
 
BARRO, R.J., SALA-I-MARTIN, X. (1991) Convergence across states and Regions, Brooking 
Papers on Economic Activity 1,  107-57. 
BARRO, R.J., SALA-I-MARTIN, X. (1992) Convergence, Journal of Political Economy 100, 223-
51. 
BERNARD, A., DURLAUF, S. (1996) Interpreting Tests of the Convergence Hypothesis, Journal 
of Econometrics 71, 161-74. 
BATABYAL, A.A. (1999) The Stability of Stochastic System: The Case of Persistence and 
Resilience, Mathematical and Computer Modelling 30, 27-34. 
BLOCK, J.,KREMEN, A.M. (1996) IQ and ego-resiliency: conceptual and empirical connections 
and separateness, Journal of  Personality and Social Psychology 70, 349-61. 
BOSKER, A., BRAKMAN, S., GARRETSEN, H., SCHRAMM, M. (2007) Looking for Multiple 
Equilibria when Geography Matters: German City Growth and the WWII Shock, Journal of 
Urban Economics 61, 152-69.  
BOSKER, A., BRAKMAN, S., GARRETSEN, H., SCHRAMM, M. (2008) A Century of Shocks: the 
Evolution of the German City Size Distribution 1925 – 1999. Regional Science and Urban 
Economics 38, 330–347. 
BRUNETTI, A., FELICE, E., VECCHI, G. (2011) Reddito in G. VECCHI (Ed.), In ricchezza e in 
povertà: Il benessere degli Italiani dall’Unità a oggi, il Mulino, Bologna, 209-34. 
CASETTI, E. (1986) The Dual Expansion Method: An Application for Evaluating the Effects of 
Population Growth on Development, Systems, Man and Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions 
16, 29-39. 
CELLINI, R., SCORCU, A.E. (2007) How many Italies? What Data Show about Growth and 
Convergence across Italian Regions, 1970-91, Rassegna di lavori dell’ISCO 13, 93-124.  
CICCARELLI, C., FENOALTEA, S. (2009), La produzione industriale delle regioni d’Italia 1861-
1913: Una ricostruzione quantitativa – Le industrie non manifatturiere Vol. 1, Banca 
d’Italia, Roma. 
CICCARELLI, C., FENOALTEA, S. (2010) Attraverso la lente d’ingrandimento: aspetti provinciali 
della crescita industriale nell’Italia post-unitaria, Economic History Working Papers – 
Quaderni di Storia Economia, No 4-2010, Banca d’Italia. 
D’AMATO M., PISTORESI, B. (1997), Statistical Evidence on Regional Cohesion in Italy, 
Giornale degli Economisti e Annali di Economia 56, 211-34. 
 27 
 
DANIELE, V., MALANIMA, P. (2007) Il prodotto delle regioni e il divario Nord-Sud in Italia 
1861-2004, Rivista di Politica Economica 97, 267-316. 
DAVIS, D., WEINSTEIN, D. (2002) Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The Geography of 
Economic Activity, American Economic Review 92, 1269-89. 
DE SIANO, R. AND D’UVA, M. (2008) Beta-convergence in Italy using a trend break date model, 
The Empirical Economic Letters 7, 589-596. 
FAZIO, G. AND PIACENTINO, D. (2010) A Spatial Multilevel Analysis of Italian SMEs’ 
Productivity, Spatial Economic Analysis 5, 299-316. 
FELICE, E. (2011a) The determinants of Italy’s regional imbalances over the long run: exploring 
the contributions of human and social capital, Oxford University Economic and Social 
History working paper series No. 088, Nuffield College, Oxford University. 
FELICE, E. (2011b) Regional value added in Italy over the long run (1891-2001): linking indirect 
estimates with official figures, and implications, UHE Working Paper 2011_04, Universitat 
Autonoma de Barcelona. 
FINGLETON, B., GARRETSEN, H., MARTIN R. (2012) Recessionary Shocks and Regional 
Employment: Evidence on the Resilience of U.K. Regions, Regional Science 52, 109-33. 
FOSTER, S. A. (1991) The expansion method: Implications for geographic research, The 
Professional Geographer 43, 131-142. 
HILL, E. W., WIAL, H. AND WOLMAN, H. (2008) Exploring Regional Resilience, Working Paper 
2008-04. Berkeley, CA: Macarthur Foundation Research Network on Building Resilient 
Regions, Institute for Urban and Regional Development, University of California. 
HOLLING, C. S. (1973) Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems, Annual Review of 
Ecology and Systematics 4, 1-23. 
HOLLING, C. S. (1996) Engineering Versus Ecological  Resilience”. In: P. SCHULZE (Ed.), 
Engineering within Ecological Constraints, National Academy Press, Washington, DC,  
31-44. 
LEVIN, S.A., BARRETT, S., ANIYAR, S., BAUMOL W., et al. (1998) Resilience in Natural and 
Socioeconomic Systems, Environment and Development Economics 3, 222-35. 
 
MACKINNON G., HAUG A., MICHELIS L. (1999) Numerical Distribution Functions of 
Likelihood Ratio Tests for Cointegration, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 14, 563-577. 
MALANIMA, P., ZAMAGNI, V. (2010) 150 years of the Italian economy, 1861-2010, Journal of 
Modern Italian Studies 15, 1-20. 
 28 
 
MARTIN, R. (2012) Regional Economic Resilience, Hysteresis and Recessionary Shocks, 
Journal of Economic Geography 12, 1-32. 
MCLACHLAN, G. J. AND. BASFORD, K.E.(Eds), (1988) Mixture Models, New York, Marcel 
Dekker. 
ONG, A. D., BERGEMAN, C.S. et al. (2006) Psychological resilience, positive emotions, and 
successful adaptation to stress in later life, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
91, 730-49. 
PENDALL, R., FOSTER, K.A., COWEL, M. (2010) Resilience and Regio