DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA ACEH

Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
Vol. 19. No. 2, Desember 2019, 203-220
DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE
OF JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA
Muhammad Dayyan
Islamic Economics and Business Faculty of IAIN Langsa
Email: muhammad.dayyan@iainlangsa.ac.id
Ainun Mardhiah
Islamic Economics and Business Faculty of IAIN Lhokseumawe
Email: aynoon.123@gmail.com
Masdalifah Sembiring
Ushuluddin, Adab and Dakwah Faculty of IAIN Langsa
Email: masdalifahsembiring@gmail.com
Abstract
This article examines the experience of da'wah, spirituality and economic resilience of
jamaah tabligh in Langsa City. Jamaah Tabligh is a community that consistently carries
out its da'wah to invite people to worship Allah Almighty by praying in congregation in
mosques. The method of da'wah is done in the form of going to people's homes, traveling
out of the area where they live by leaving their families in between two days, a week or
even 40 days known as khuruj. Through observation of da'wah activities and family
conditions, interviews with 5 males and 5 female jamaah tabligh families and one focus
group discussion found that da'wah experiences, spiritual experiences and economic
resilience of the jamaah tabligh families. That da'wah experiences face a number of
challenges in the form of rejection and expulsion from the community faced calmly and
patiently. The spiritual experience of increasing the sense of faith in the form of belief in
the mercy of Allah has had an impact on the tranquility of the life of the family of the
congregation. In terms of family economic resilience by the standards of dharuriyah and
hajjiyah it has been fulfilled through savings, assistance from other jamaah members
and side jobs by the wife of the jamaah.
Keywords: Jamaah Tabligh; Dakwah; Spirituality; Economy Resiliance.
Abstrak
Artikel ini membahas pengalaman dakwah, spiritualitas, dan ketahanan ekonomi
Jamaah Tabligh di Kota Langsa. Jamaah Tabligh adalah sebuah komunitas yang
secara konsisten melakukan dakwahnya dengan mengajak orang untuk menyembah
Allah SWT dengan sholat berjamaah di masjid-masjid. Metode dakwah dilakukan
dalam bentuk pergi ke rumah-rumah penduduk, bepergian keluar dari daerah tempat
mereka tinggal dengan meninggalkan keluarga mereka di antara dua hari, seminggu
atau bahkan sampai 40 hari yang dikenal sebagai khuruj. Melalui pengamatan
kegiatan dakwah dan kondisi keluarga, wawancara dengan lima pria dan lima wanita
dari keluarga Jamaah Tabligh dan satu fokus diskusi terbatas ditemukan pengalaman
dakwah, pengalaman spiritual dan ketahanan ekonomi keluarga Jamaah Tabligh bisa
ditelusuri. Pengalaman dakwah mereka ialah ketika menghadapi sejumlah tantangan
dalam bentuk penolakan dan pengusiran dari masyarakat yang dihadapi dengan
tenang dan sabar. Pengalaman spiritual mereka semakin meningkatkan rasa keimanan
dalam bentuk kepercayaan pada rahmat Allah dan disebutkan berdampak pada
ketenangan hidup keluarga anggota Jamaah Tabligh. Sementara, dalam hal ketahanan
ekonomi keluarga, mereka meyakini sudah memenuhi standar dharuriyah dan hajjiyah
yang dipenuhi melalui adanya tabungan, bantuan dari anggota jamaah lain dan
pekerjaan sampingan oleh istri anggota Jamaah Tabligh.
Kata Kunci: Jamaah Tabligh; Dakwah,
MUHAMMAD DAYYAN, AINUN MARDHIAH, MASDALIFAH SEMBIRING
204 | Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
صلختسم
 ةعاجم تناك .اسجنل ةنيدبم غيلبتلا ةعاملج ةيداصتقلإا ةناتمو ةيحورلاو ةوعدلا ةبرتج نع ةلاقلما هذه ثحبت
لما في ةعاملجا ةلاص لثم الله ةدابعل عمت او ناسنلإا ةوعد في ةقباطم ةعاجم يه غيلبتلا ةقيرط امأ .دجاس
 ينموي دادع في ينعم تقو في ةلئاعلا كترب هترئاد نم جراخ ةلحرلا وأ رفسلاو ،سانلا تويب ةرايزب موقت ةوعدلا
 ةلاحو ةوعدلا ةطشنأ ىلع ةظحلالما نمو .جورلخاب ىمسلما اموي ينعبرأ لىإ لصت كلذ قوفو عوبسلأا وأ
لا نم تاعاجم ةسخم عم ةلباقلما تماق ثم ،ةلئاعلا ةدحاو ةرم ىلع ةيعاجم ةشقانبمو ثانلإا نم ةسخمو روكذ
 فيو .غيلبتلا ةعاجم دنع  ةلئاعلا ةيداصتقإ ةناتمو ةيحورلا ةبرخو ةوعدلا ةبرخ يهو رهاوظلا ةثلاث ثحابلا دجو
 ءودلهاب اههجاوي يذلا عمت ا نم درطلاو ضفرلا لكش في تايدحتلا نم ددع ةعاملجا هجاوت ةوعدلا ةبرتج
 .برصلو ةنيكس ىلع يرثأت هل الله ةحمر ىلع دقتعيو نايملإاب روعشلا ةدايز لكش في نوكت ةيحورلا ةبرتج امأو
 نم اهقيقتح تم دقف ةيجالحاو ةيرورضلا رايعلم اقفو ةلئاعلا ةيداصتقلإا ةناتم ةيحان نمو   .ةعاملجا ةلئاعل ةايلحا
ةجوزلا موقتو نيرخلأا ةعاملجا نم ةدعاسلماو تارخدلما للاخةيبناج ةفيظوب
تاملكلاةّيسيئرلا:غيلبتلا ةعاجم;ةيحورلا ،ةوعدلا;ةناتموةيداصتقلإا
A. INTRODUCTION
Islam as a religion of da'wah encourages every Muslim to invite people through
da'wah activities to return to the path of Allah, namely the path of virtue in order to survive
the world and the hereafter by practicing the teachings of Islam. Islamic teaching is a perfect
and comprehensive conception, because it covers all aspects of human life, both those related
to the world and the hereafter. Islam has ideological thingking, namely enforcing amar ma'ruf
nahy mungkar in the society in order to create a just prosperous society within the pleasure of
Allah swt. To achieve that goal also among the Islamic ummah has been done a number of
da'wah by the preacher organizations in order to increase da'wah in a more systematic way in
the society. Among Islamic organizations concerned with da'wah are Jamaah Jamaah. In the
view of Jamaah Tabligh activists, da'wah is very important, as the core of da'wah activities is
to disseminate Islamic teachings in the life of mankind. Even more important is how to realize
religion in humans. The daily Tabligh Jama'at is more preoccupied with matters of worship
and da'wah even leaving the family for some days to months to carry out da'wah trips known
as khuruj and jaulah to areas far from the home.
Jama'ah Tabligh was born in 1920, it was initiated by Maulana Muhammad Ilyas with
a mission to improve society to return to Islamic teachings. As a religious entity that is active
and has survived to this day the community of the Tabligh congregation has been researched
and discussed academically. In terms of the preaching material that was conveyed there was
really no difference with what had been conveyed by the previous scholars namely within the
DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF
JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA
Vol. 19. No. 2, Desember 2019 | 205
Sunni School of thought or Ahlus Sunnah Waljamaah and they did not question the
differences in fiqh schools because the focus on the preaching about Allah's Essence, the
hereafter and obligations of da’wah for every Muslim. Then they practiced what the Prophet
had practiced with his companions in appearance, daily behavior both eating and dressing and
others1. Da'wah delivered by the communication model of information, namely interfaith
preaching, then the jama'i model is to deliver da'wah to the villagers themselves, a special
model of da'wah delivered to families, relatives, government officials, community leaders,
and general da'wah models conveyed to the public who have different backgrounds
(Saepuloh, 2009). One of the most prominent in the activities of the Tablighi Jama'ah
movement is the concept of da'wah and tabligh which they understand, namely going out to
the interests of da'wah termed "khuruj", or "khuruj fi-sabilillah (literally means going out in
the way of Allah) understood from the words "ukhrijat" in QS Ali ‘Imran: 110, and" yakhruj
"in Q.S. al-Nisa ': 100, which is the main proposition regarding the obligation of khuruj. In
addition, they also made Q.S. al-Ashr: 1-3, Q.S. Fussilat: 33, Q.S. al-Saff: 14 and Ali ‘Imran:
104 as arguments about the command to preach in the way of Allah. Then the missionary
activities carried out by Jama'ah Tabligh are by traveling from one place to another. This
activity is referred to as jaulah as the inspiration of Jama'ah Tabligh for preaching Islam by
going from house to house to preach and friendship. In their view, it is the method of the
Messenger of Allah in spreading the Islamic period of Mecca by coming to the tribes that
came in the pilgrimage season2.
The presence of the Jamaah Tabligh in Indonesia generally received a positive
response and they were also part of the power of Islam that could cooperate with other Islamic
powers. Through a high spirit of da'wah, Islam has become more widespread even in remote
areas. The spirit of their da'wah is a commendable thing with all the advantages and
disadvantages of the method they are doing3. Religious behavior and activities cultivated by
Jama'ah Tabligh are one form of mental health therapy from the perspective of Religious
Psychology. They are people who have been prosecuted and then preached, treated and then
treated, expressed their personality in the faith and then shrugged off others. They are people
who merge their individual egos and shape them into an impression of collective membership.
So that da'wah is no longer seen as an individual activity but a group activity. Individual pride
1 Abdul Aziz, The Jamaah Tabligh Movement in Indonesia : Peaceful Fundamentalist (Studi Islamika,
Vol. 11, No. 3, 2004), 467-517.
2Didi Junaedi, “Memahami Teks, Melahirkan Konteks: Menelisik Interpretasi Ideologis Jamaah
Tabligh”, Journal of Qur’an and Hadith Studies, Vol. 2, No. 1, 2013, 1-17.
3Umdatul Hasanah, “Keberadaan Kelompok Jamaah Tabligh dan Reaksi Masyarakat (Perspektif Teori
Penyebaran Informasi dan Pengaruh)”, Indo-Islamika, Volume 4, Nomor 1, 2014, 21-40.
MUHAMMAD DAYYAN, AINUN MARDHIAH, MASDALIFAH SEMBIRING
206 | Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
fuses into the pride of the group which will further form Islamic pride4. Members of the
Jamaah Tabligh have high enthusiasm when speaking so that they seem to abandon their wife
and children. Jamaah Tabligh still maintains the legal spirit, that the husband is obliged to
provide for his wife. It is not appropriate if there is an understanding that the khuruj is
allowed to leave the obligation as a husband, so that it does not provide for the children and
wives left behind.5.
This article captures the daily life of Jamaah Tabligh in the city of Langsa, with the
research variable not only looking at the methods and contents of its preaching, but also to
explore the experience of da'wah, the spirituality of the congregation, and the economic
endurance of the Jamaah Tabligh’s families. How the Jamaah Tabligh in Langsa City has a
vision to bring religion to perfection in themselves and in all humans and all nature by
preaching. How then did they make arrangements for the family's economic resilience when
they made the da'wah trip? The struggle for spirituality, the consistency of da'wah, the
resilience of the family economy which is concerned with the aspects of the ukhrawi should
be studied to be found as an increasingly alienated and individualist model of life amid the
pace of the economy and technological modernity. Furthermore, the focus of this article
explains how the phenomenon of da’wah of Jamaah Tabligh in Langsa City? What is the
economic resilience of the family of followers of the Jamaah Tabligh in Langsa City? What is
the economic religiosity and resilience of the Tabligh congregation Family in Langsa City
when the head of the family goes to preach?
THEORITICAL FRAMEWORK
Da’wah Theory
Da'wah is semantically derived from Arabic word, namely "da'wah" which means
inviting and calling (QS Albaqara verse 221), prayer (QS Ali Imran verse 38), accusing or
assuming it is not good (QS Maryam verse 91), complaining ( QS Alqamar verse 10), call
(QS Ar Rum verse 25), ask (QS Shad verse 51), invite (QS Alqasshas verse 25), caller (QS
Thaha verse 108), call name or title (QS Annur verse 63) and adopted children (Surat al-
Ahzab verse 4).6 Besides that there are a number of terms that are similar to preaching,
namely; first, tabligh which means "to convey" the culprit is called the preacher; second,
4Siti Zulaiha, Jamaah Tabligh dalam Perspektif Psikologis, Fokus: Jurnal Kajian Keislaman dan
Kemasyarakatan, Vol 1.1. No. 02. 2016)), 101-118.,
5Nilhakim, “Pemikiran Tokoh Jamaah Tabligh Terhadap Standar Minimal Nafkah Wajib  Suami
Kepada Istri (Studi Konstruksi Standar Minimal Nafkah di Desa Mentibar Kecamatan Paloh Kabupaten Sambas
Kalimantan Barat)”, Thesis, UIN Sunan Ampel, Surabaya, 2016.
6Moh. Ali Aziz, Ilmu Dakwah, edisi revisi, cetakan ke-5 (Jakarta; Prenadamedia Group,  2016), 6-9
DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF
JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA
Vol. 19. No. 2, Desember 2019 | 207
advice which means conveying a statement to another person to correct a lack or error in his
behavior; third, tabsyir, which is to give religious descriptions to others whose content is in
the form of encouraging news from those who receive it, such as news about God's promises
that give rewards to the people of faith and good deeds; fourth, tandzir which is conveying
religious descriptions to others whose contents are warnings or threats to people who violate
the Shari'a of Allah swt; fifth, the sermon is a speech delivered to show listeners about the
importance of a religious discussion or description; the six washiyah or taushiyah which
means a message or command about something in the context of da'wah in the form of a
moral message that must be carried out by the recipient of the will; seventh, tarbiyah or
ta'lim, which is education and teaching which is a transformation of science-values, as well as
skills that shape the insights, attitudes, and behavior of individuals or society; and eighth
‘amar ma'ruf nahy mungkar which means ordering to do good and preventing people from
committing crimes and abominations7.
Da'wah is an invitation to the path of Allah which is the duty of the Apostles and all
their followers, with the aim of giving humanity from the darkness to the light, from kufr to
faith, from polytheism to tauhidullah, and from hell (jahiliyah and jahim) to His heaven 8.
Da'wah is an active, persuasive, and comprehensive process. In other words the preacher must
look for people as da'wah partners, then give persuasion and invite him to pursue Allah9.
According to Rabbi 'the missionary activity stands on the foundations and principles of
definite value. Already a necessity, if a missionary activity shifts from that principle and
foundation, then the da'wah struggle becomes paralyzed and not straight again, will never
produce results as desired, even though all time, effort, and effort have been exhausted10. The
main purpose of da'wah is to change society towards a better and more prosperous, outward
and inner life11. The essence of Islamic da'wah is faith actualization manifested in a system of
faithful human activities, in the field of society that is carried out regularly, to influence the
way to feel, think, behave and act human on the plains of individual and socio-cultural reality
in order to realize the teachings of Islam in all aspects of human life, using certain methods12.
7 Moh. Ali Aziz, Ilmu Dakwah…, hal. 20-37.
8Rabi’ bin Hadi Al Madkhali, Manhaj Da’wah Para Nabi Dengan Landasan Hikmah dan Rasio, alih
bahasa oleh Abu Fahmi, Cet. 3 (Gema Insani Press, Jakarta,1995), 8.
9 Moh. Ali Aziz, Ilmu Dakwah…, 41.
10Rabi’ bin Hadi Al Madkhali, Manhaj Da’wah …), 8-13.
11Didin Hafifuddin, Manajemen Dakwah, dalam buku Solusi Islam atas Problemantikan Ummat
(Ekonomi, Pendidikan, dan Dakwah) yang ditulis Adi Sasono dkk (Jakarta; Gema Insani Press, 1998), 175
12Didin Hafifuddin, Manajemen Dakwah, dalam buku Solusi Islam atas Problemantikan Ummat
(Ekonomi, Pendidikan, dan Dakwah) yang ditulis Adi Sasono dkk (Jakarta: Gema Insani Press, 1998), 177
MUHAMMAD DAYYAN, AINUN MARDHIAH, MASDALIFAH SEMBIRING
208 | Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
The success of da'wah when it is able to change the environment in more detail so that
it can lay the foundation for the existence of Islamic society, instill values of justice, equality,
unity, peace, goodness, and beauty as the core drivers of community development. Then
provide the basis of Islamic orientation of scientific and technological activities, realize
cultural systems that are rooted in the spiritual dimension which is the basis of expression of
faith, increase public awareness to uphold the law, integrate small groups into a unity of the
people, realize justice in weak economic fields, and provide basic framework of harmony in
human relations with the natural environment.13
2. Spirituality Theory
To understand how the religiosity phenomenon of the Jamaah Tabligh will be studied
using the theory of spirituality in Islam that has been developed by Islamic scholars. Islam is
the only religion that maintains a balance between the world and the hereafter. With that
belief, we never give up and frustrate amid the hustle and bustle of humans who are shackled
in ignorance, moral decadence, occultism, and hedonism which only wants to satisfy physical
lust. That is what Muhammad Fethullah Gulen calls a spirituality and moral erosion that takes
place in a society that will surely cause a break in the divine grace of that society14. According
to him the only way to elevate the dignity of Muslims from the downturn that they are
experiencing in the midst of advances in science and technology that is developing at this time
is to rediscover our true identity and explore the values, patterns of reasoning, and rational life
order taught Islam. In addition, Muslims must always have passion, determination, patience,
ideals, and sufficient determination.
According to Abdul Mujib and Jusuf Mudzakir spiritual intelligence is not a religious
doctrine that invites mankind to be smart in choosing or embracing one of the supposedly true
religions. Spiritual intelligence is more a concept that relates to how intelligent people are in
managing and utilizing the meanings, values, and qualities of their spiritual lives. Spiritual life
here includes the desire for meaningful life (the will to meaning) that motivates human life to
always seek the meaning of life (the meaning of life) and longs for meaningful life. Spiritual
intelligence as part of psychology considers that someone who is religious is not necessarily
having spiritual intelligence. Often they have an attitude of fanaticism, eclusivism, and
intolerance towards followers of other religions, resulting in hostility and warfare. But on the
contrary, it can be someone who is a non-religious humanist who has high spiritual
13Didin Hafifuddin, Manajemen Dakwah), 178
14Muhammad Fethullah Gulen, Bangkitnya Spiritulitas Islam, alih bahasa oleh Fuad Saefuddin (Jakarta:
Republika, 2012)), 8
DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF
JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA
Vol. 19. No. 2, Desember 2019 | 209
intelligence, so that his attitude of life is inclusive, agrees in differences, and is full of
tolerance. So spirituality here is not always religious or godly meaning15.
Then spiritual intelligence in Islam needs to be added to godly intelligence which
becomes the potential of heart intelligence in the structure of human concepts according to
Islam divided into three components, namely heart, mind, and lust. So in this study we will
look at the characteristics of Islamic spirituality in the perspective of Islamic psychology
summarized in the work of Abdul Mujib and Jusuf Mudzakir where the form of spirituality
can be seen from the following seventeen characteristics16 namely ikhbat attitude namely the
condition of a soft and humble heart, feeling calm and faith of God, and not persecuting
others. Zuhud attitude that is by raising actions that are not beneficial to the afterlife, reducing
long dreams, not feeling happy with the existence of the world, and not feeling sorry for
losing the world, feeling spacious if separated from the entanglement of world ownership,
trying to get out of the shackles of the dynasty towards the hereafter, and free from material
dependence. Wara’ attitude is to protect oneself from actions that are not profane which can
reduce one's degree and authority. The attitude of the king 'that is always hoping for a good
from God accompanied by earnest effort and resignation. Hope to always meet God who is
motivated by longing for Him. Ri'ayah's attitude is to maintain the knowledge that has been
obtained and apply it to real behavior, by doing good and sincere deeds, and avoiding
destructive actions. Increase charity based on knowledge and assume that the charity that has
been done is felt to be small and small. Fear that what is done is based on feelings of showing
off, looking for face, and sheer nonsense and always maintaining mental clarity from every
step and second. Muqarabah's attitude is the awareness that he is always supervised by God
both what he thinks, feels, and does, both physically and mentally. His attitude is alert, self-
conscious and careful both in the form of thoughts, feelings, and actions, because anytime and
anywhere he is always under God's supervision
The ihklas attitude is purity and obedience that is shown only to God, by purify
actions, both physically and mentally, from the attention of beings always cleanse his
behavior from all the mixtures that pollute him like desires of lust for praise, flattery,
possessions, and other motives that are not blessed by Allah. The istiqamah attitude is to do a
good job through the principle of continuity and immortality. Resignation is to surrender
wholeheartedly, so that no psychological burden is felt. Lean and believe in others in
15Abdul Mujib, dan Jusuf Mudzakir, Nuansa-Nuansa Psikologi Islam (Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada,
2001), 324-325
16Abdul Mujib, dan Jusuf Mudzakir, Nuansa-Nuansa…), 333-357
MUHAMMAD DAYYAN, AINUN MARDHIAH, MASDALIFAH SEMBIRING
210 | Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
completing affairs, because they do not have the ability to represent or delegate all affairs to
God Almighty as a substance capable of completing all matters, after humans no longer have
the power and ability to solve them.
The shabar attitude is being able to refrain from things that are hated and holding back
oral so as not to complain. This attitude will avoid someone from feeling restless, anxious,
angry and chaotic. Patience is also a calm attitude to avoid immorality, carry out orders, and
accept trials. Ridha that is willing to what is owned and given. This is the spiritual position of
a person who is endeavored after he has carried out the resignation because of the ridha of
being the peak of tawakkal. The syukur attitude is to reveal the blessings of Allah Almighty
performed by His servants. Syukur or oral means to show with praise and recognition, syukur
means meaning witnessing and feeling calm, and body gratitude means to submit and obey
His commands. Al Haya's attitude or shame is self-sensitivity which encourages to leave evil
and fulfill obligations. As-shidq or honest attitude is the match between what is said and the
actual event, the suitability between what is kept secret and what is shown, and the right
words when dealing with people who are feared or expected.
Al itsar's attitude is to prioritize or prioritize the interests of others, especially in the
matter of muamalah with fellow human beings with generosity. Having a muru'ah attitude or
prestige that upholds the great human traits which include the practice of good behavior and
abandoning bad behavior and avoiding despicable and low deeds. Having a qana'ah attitude is
being able to accept what they are after mobilizing all their efforts as optimally as possible,
then he receives the results of his efforts, but he has not been able to reach the peak of his
desires. Even so, he did not feel like a failure, let alone frustrated, but he was still stubborn
trying to accept what he was even though according to the size of other people the enjoyment
was very minimal.
3. Theory of Family Economic Resilience
To understand the economic resilience of jamaah tabligh the author uses an economic
sociology approach, namely studying the relationship between the people, in which social and
economic interactions occur. In the context of this study jamaah tabligh as a society that will
be seen as an external-objective reality will guide individuals in carrying out economic
activities such as production, consumption and distribution which are influenced by the
religious understanding they adhere to.
In the study of economic sociology a number of theories have been formulated to
understand how society conducts economic activities and what orders these economic
activities. One of the theories related to economic relations with religion is that we can see in
DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF
JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA
Vol. 19. No. 2, Desember 2019 | 211
one of Max Weber's works (1864-1920) entitled The Protestant Ethics and The Spirit of
Capitalism which states that western economic behavior is meticulous, calculating, hard work
in business driven by the development of Protestant ethics that emerged in the 16th century
and was driven by the doctrine of calvanism, namely the doctrine of destiny. An
understanding of destiny requires the belief that God has decided about safety and accidents.
In this doctrine no one knows whether he is a chosen person. So the adherents of Calvinism
experience "panic about safety" and the way to calm the panic is that people must think that
someone will not succeed without being blessed by God. Therefore success is a sign of
electability. To achieve success, someone must carry out life activities, including economic
activities based on discipline and modesty, which are driven by religious teachings.
According to Weber's theory, work ethics when calvinism combines with the spirit of
capitalism brings Western society to the development of modern capitalist society. So the
doctrine of calvinism about destiny provides the psychological impetus for rationalization17.
The family becomes a measure of the success of da'wah where if the economically lack and
deficid then in fact it is also a barrier to the success of da'wah itself. Whereas in the ethical
code of da'wah there is a moral obligation that must be observed by a da'i when he wishes to
carry out his da’wah activities. The code of ethics is "if a preacher wants to carry out his
da'wah in the the community, he must first carry out the da'wah for his own family". There
cannot be or deviate from the da'wah code of ethics if a da'i is unable to invite his family who
are already believers with him, while he himself is busy inviting others in his da’wah
activities18. So the portrait of the life of a da’i both personal and family life becomes a mirror
for the success of da'wah that he does in the society. It would be seen as unethically
disgraceful, if a da'i is busy prosecuting others while his family is left neglected from da'wah
calls or is economically disorganized.
B. METHOD
This research conducted qualitative method with the object of study being human, as
explained by Kant is included in the phenomenon and noumena, because it has thoughts,
beliefs, desires, intentions, intentions and goals. Therefore, for complex human behavior,
interpretations that are not causal are needed and cannot also be explained through legal
discovery of empirical generalizations that depend on quantity and mere numerical
calculations. The object of this research is that everything that is thought, believed, felt, and
17Abdul Mujib, dan Jusuf Mudzakir, Nuansa-Nuansa…, ), 21-22
18M. Yunan Yusuf, Dakwah Rasulullah Sejarah & Problemantika (Jakarta: Kencana,  2011), 18
MUHAMMAD DAYYAN, AINUN MARDHIAH, MASDALIFAH SEMBIRING
212 | Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
done by the Jamah Tablighis and their families is related to da'wah, rituality and religiosity as
well as their household economic behavior. Then the anthropological approach of religion is
one way of studying the activities carried out by Muslim groups who call themselves jamaah
tabligh. Why is the anthropology of religion because the object of study is the teachings or
ideologies to Islam that develop into social phenomena that are influenced by various cultural
factors which are believed to originate from the interpretation of Islamic teachings19. This is
suitable for understanding the phenomenon of religious life in the community, especially the
jamah tabligh in Langsa City.
Primary data is obtained directly through observation, interviews, and focus group
discussions. Observing directly to the houses of jamaah tabligh to see the situation objectively
followed by indirect interviews was conducted with Amir, members, and the family of the
jamah tabligh. Observations made with this study included participatory observation. In this
observation, researchers are involved with the daily activities of people who are being
observed or used as research data sources. While making observations, researchers take part
in doing what the data sources do and join in feeling their grief. With this participant
observation, the data obtained will be more complete, sharp and to know at the level of
meaning of each visible behavior. The type of interview used in this study is structured
interview. The purpose of this type of interview is to find problems more openly, where the
parties invited to interview are asked for their opinions and ideas. Focus Group Discussion is
a small group structured with selected participants and organized for the purpose of exploring
specific topics, and individual views and experiences, through group interactions. The
purpose of Focus Group Discussion is to obtain perceptions and attitudes about the issues
discussed. The discussion takes place openly, so that each individual involved can express his
opinion freely and openly. To strengthen the data, there were also limited discussions through
a meeting of ten jamah tabligh at one of the houses of members of the jamaah Tabligh.
Secondary data is data sourced from reading material in the form of books, journals, and
others in the library.
C. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
Dakwah Experience of Jamaah Tabligh in Langsa City
For jamaah tabligh da'wah is a way of life that has been united in runitas and lifestyle.
For them there is no day without da'wah because it is the duty of every Muslim that must be
19Bustanuddin Agus, Agama Dalam Kehidupan Manusia Pengantar Antropologi Agama (Jakarta: Raja
Grafindo Persada, 2006), hal.31
DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF
JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA
Vol. 19. No. 2, Desember 2019 | 213
carried out in every moment in this world. Although you have to deal with various challenges
and obstacles that are not easy, but it becomes part of the test of life that must be passed. The
jamaah tabligh took the path of da'wah according to what was taught by the teacher and their
emir among the way they preached was to visit the houses of the people as explained by
Muktar one of jamaah tabligh who works as a civil servant teacher in Langsa City. Light and
remind them of worship, invite commonities to pray in congregation to the mosque, invite to
attend the recitation in the mosque 20.
Moreover da’wah jamaah tabligh run a persuasive approach that is an interpersonal
approach, not in the pulpit or on stage where the audience is gathered somewhere. This
approach is more familiar which is done intensively without despair. Da'wah activities can
take several days and several months. Da'wah trips can take at least 3 days. I have participated
in the shortest da'wah trip, which is 3 days or the longest up to 4 months21. Interpersonal
approaches are also shown where they live in the community. From our observation that
members of the jamaah tabligh are very open to the surrounding community. They join with
the community and no obstacles for the women even though they were veiled but they could
still participate in the feminine activities carried out in the area and even some people
participated in the tour activities with the women of Gampong Blang in Langsa City. For the
community, the existence of jamaah tabligh preaching is a positive and acceptable thing.
But when they preach outside the area they experience a number of challenges both
internally and externally come. Among the challenges of preaching internally is in
demonstrating the example in carrying out the da'wah material that they convey starting from
the consistency of worship. From the matter of worship, the challenge is we must practice the
Prophet's Sunnah from the smallest thing, such as mating, so that used to brush teeth with a
siwak, start learning siwak, it is also a challenge because it changes old habits. Whereas from
an external point of view, there is a rejection from the accused party, for example, there are
residents who are very difficult to talk to or even avoid 22.
Furthermore, it is not uncommon for rejection to be carried out more aggressively in
the form of expulsion, or ridicule by the community because it is considered as a form of
disturbing people's habits. As stated by Riki that "because I often meet and live with new and
foreign people, it can be the Jamaah itself or with the inhabitants of the inhabited area, I have
a good socializing experience because I know the character of different people, some have
20 Interview with Muktar, Member of Jamaah Tabligh.
21 Interview with Muktar member of Jamaah Tabligh.
22 Interview with Amar member of Jamaah Tabligh.
MUHAMMAD DAYYAN, AINUN MARDHIAH, MASDALIFAH SEMBIRING
214 | Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
easily prosecuted, easily melted his heart, there were also those who did not accept and even
drove us from the mosque that we had visited. Other experiences when we were khuruj
outside Aceh we were once rebuked with words "to give da’wah others when there are still
many people in Aceh who do not pray why not just preach them. Here we feel a brief jolt if
we think there is truth, but aren't the dai whose lectures throughout the archipelago such as
Ustadz Abdul Somad from Riau not all of the Riau people have good worship. This means
that preaching in other people's places does not mean that the village itself is good23. But they
interpret it as part of the da'wah test that can raise the degree of preachers because besides the
knowledge gained also the worship that is done is also increasingly active "24.
Rejection of the da’wah of jamaah tabligh efforts is common because not everyone
likes to be prosecuted. Because the Prophets were also rejected in their preaching and even
threatened to kill. And they admit that they are part of an experience that is not easy to deal
with. Not everyone wants to be charged, some are hard and opposed25. The challenge of
preaching is sometimes there are areas where citizens easily accept it, but it is also not
uncommon for those who immediately refuse to even expel us26.
Spiritual Experience of the Jamaah Tablihg in Langsa City
Da'wah activities carried out by the Jamaah Tabligh  can influence the spirit of its
members. The influence of ruhaniyah on the activities of khuruj fi sabilillah can improve the
spirit of the Jamaah Tabligh to worship. Spirituality is an essential part of a person's overall
health and well-being 27. Everyday in khuruj, participants intensely deepened their religious
knowledge such as listening to lectures, studying the Qur'an and hadith, practicing patience
because in the location of da'wah sometimes it was not as comfortable as at home. In addition,
members of the Jamaah Tabligh must also be patient with far away from the family. Even so
that da’wah activities run solemnly, they do not contact the families left behind. So it can be
said that during the journey of the preaching of the Jamaah Tabligh they tried to leave the
world and only think of the hereafter.
From the initial interviews with members of the jamaah tabligh, namely Mr. Heri (55
years), Mr. Safrudin (50 years), and Mr. Syamsul (30 years), they said that before taking part in
23Focus Group Discussion and Interview with Muhammad member of Jamaah Tabligh.
24Interview with Riki member of Jamaah Tabligh.
25 Interview with Udin member of Jamaah Tabligh.
26 Interview with Riki member of Jamaah Tabligh.
27Yustina Surani  Indriyati Eko Purwaningsih, Peran Kecerdasan Spiritualitas Dan Kecerdasan
Emosional Terhadap Kebermaknaan Hidup  Pada Suster Yang Purnakarya. (Jurnal Spirits. Vol. 4, No. 2,
2014).
DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF
JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA
Vol. 19. No. 2, Desember 2019 | 215
khuruj activities, they almost never prayed, their days after he used it in places of immorality, if
night was in cafes, if it was afternoon at the gambling table and drinking and using illegal drugs.
After following the khuruj activities for three days in earnest he felt a change that was so
extraordinary that he had understood and carried out prayers in an orderly manner (place,
manner and time) and had been embedded in hatred for the immorality he had done so far. Even
more powerful, he felt like he had studied in a boarding school for three years.
In terms of the practice of worship, the jamaah tabligh learn to practice the Sunnah of
the Prophet, learn to discipline themselves in worship and also practice patience because they
live with people of different characters, some are patient and strong, some are selfish and
such. In the course of their da'wah they found a spiritual feeling in the form of affection, care
and more obedient worship as expressed by Riki worshipers who work as furniture carpenters
"Togetherness among members, compassion, caring and most importantly being more diligent
in worshiping" 28. From that experience the feeling of being close to God is getting higher,
besides that the spiritual feeling was expressed by Rizki "God willing, with this journey I
gained merit for inviting obedience to Allah, I also became more spirit of worship and study
with the many challenges in preaching making the quality of patience the most, especially the
patience in preaching Islam to the villagers, with a variety of responses from them, we must
be demanded to remain patient, because if we are angry or reply to berate and curse, they will
not melt but instead it is hostile, it is very dangerous and we avoid it29. Here the spirituality of
patience seems to increase when worshipers carry out da'wah. The value of patience is also
carried away in worship activities when they visit many places and meet many people to make
pilgrims experience a lot, a lot of knowledge so that in matters of worship the more
enthusiastic about practicing daily sunnah and becoming more active than before. The
members of the jamaah tabligh are required to practice all the Sunnah of the Prophet, from the
smallest ones, for example eating may not stand, must pray before and after, must use the
right hand, prioritize the older, may not remain, should not be excessive, it all of them are
light daily sunnah, but rarely noticed. In this Jamaah Tabligh we learn more about getting
used to practicing the Sunnah30.
Spiritual experience through discipline of worship "For matters of worship, we are
more disciplined than before, who used to only do compulsory duties, now getting used to
doing sunnah worship, besides that we also get knowledge from every recitation that we
28 Interview with Riki member of Jamaah Tabligh.
29 Interview with Taufik member of Jamaah Tabligh.
30 Interview with Mahyar member of Jamaah Tabligh.
MUHAMMAD DAYYAN, AINUN MARDHIAH, MASDALIFAH SEMBIRING
216 | Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
routinely follow31. Mental maturity is getting higher when the pilgrims get new friends and
relatives, we also gain experience, mental maturity as well as a lot of knowledge that greatly
helps us in worshiping Allah SWT or feeling the quality of worship as good. The worshipers
are increasingly convinced that the reward of Allah is a person who fights in his way, besides
that the brotherhood of fellow worshipers and the Muslim community is getting tighter and
stronger the quality of worship is better than before 32.
The increase in spirituality is not only felt by male jamaah, but for female also gets the
same enthusiasm as feeling patient when abandoned by their husbands. As a family left by my
husband to strive in the way of Allah, I must thicken my faith that what we do is worship so
that I can be patient in looking after myself and children as long as my husband is not there33.
Other jamaah said that spiritual is also when involved with different people he gets patience
and wise and forgiving. Living with new people is known for many challenges, especially the
problem of patience, must not be selfish, must be wise, and forgivness of the others34 added
also often read prayer, the increasing quantity of worship is not only mandatory but the
sunnah worship has often been done. I am not only do obligatory worship but also become
more diligent in worshiping as guided by sunnah35.
Economy Resilience of the Jamaah Tabligh Family in Langsa City
When husbands do a da’wah journey they are faced with a problem of obligation to the
family. This obligation can cause problems when members of the Jama'ah Tabligh cannot
balance obligations for the family and khurûj obligations. According to Abdurrahman Ahmad
Assirbuny, one of the leaders of the Jamaah Tabligh gave an explanation of the public's notion
that Jamaah Tabligh has been wrongful leaving their wive and their children without
responsibility and fulfilling their families' livelihoods. Assirbuny explained that actually
providing for a wife's child is the instinct of a family member, namely the sense of
responsibility of a family head towards his family. Even though he was a communist, atheist,
infidel, polytheist, criminal, murderer, thief, corrupt, and so on. But the standard of family
living is not enough to give a house, food, clothes, and so on. A husband is not only demanded
for a living, but the main thing is to provide a living faith and religion to his family experts36.
31Interview with Udin member of Jamaah Tabligh.
32 Interview with Abu member of Jamaah Tabligh.
33Interview with Imar wife’s member of Jamaah Tabligh.
34 Interview with Ican wife’s member of Jamaah Tabligh.
35 Interview with Iwar wife’s member of Jamaah Tabligh.
36 Nilhakim, Pemikiran Tokoh Jamaah Tabligh…, Master Thesis, UIN Sunan Ampel, Surabaya, 2018.
DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF
JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA
Vol. 19. No. 2, Desember 2019 | 217
Economic resilience is one of the pillars of building a happy family, with the existence
of economic adequacy, the fulfillment of various family needs such as eating, drinking,
clothing, shelter, education, and worship. Portraits of the economic life of the Jamah Tabligh
family can be said to be very stable even though sometimes a family head is not together for a
long time when they are tasked with carrying out a da’wah mission in a way that is out of the
area for up to a month. From the observations that we have made, there is only one house that
can be said to be a bit of luxury, has complete electronic equipment, with walls and tiled
floors, while four other houses have semi-walled walls, one house has not been plastered and
all houses are cemented. These houses all have adequate rooms, there are kitchens, guest
room and bed room. However, no one made the bathroom separate from the house because it
would result in the opening of the female genitals when they were in the bathroom.
Based on our observations of the five houses of the head of the family, that the five
houses of the members of jamaah tabligh are very simple. There is no extravagant luxury
furniture, the house is only filled with Islamic religious books and home appliances that are
needed. On average the houses of two houses are still wood-paneled and the other three have
been walled and all are cemented. These houses have tin roofs. Almost all houses are
equipped with electronic equipment such as refrigerators, washing machines and iron.
However, not one house has a TV because according to their information, there is a
prohibition to buy a TV because it can neglect worshiping God and more harm. Every house
has two-wheeled vehicles as a means of family transportation. Although the average family
visited has many children, at least still have two children and the most have up to 6 children.
However, according to them, it is not permissible for family planning because many children
will invite a lot of sustenance and add to the jamaah tabligh themselves. Regarding the needs
of the family when they go out preaching in a certain period of time they are many da’i by
saving money. There are who first save for family use as expressed by Mrs. Iwar "my
husband has a deposit of money and is assisted by another jamaah tabligh" as also felt by Ms.
Mastura, so it takes time before leaving. Mr. Udin explained how to safeguard the family's
economic needs "I saved before leaving and left savings for family expenses, the rest of the
neighbors and other jamaah tabligh from my village and from other villages took turns
helping". In terms of financing, so we it saves money for the cost of travel and the family
income that we leave behind, then, mentally, we must be more patient in facing various
situations where we live with people of diverse characters and traits.
What's interesting is that most of the family's economic needs are carried out through
mutual assistance and mutual assistance among fellow jamaah tabligh. As explained by
MUHAMMAD DAYYAN, AINUN MARDHIAH, MASDALIFAH SEMBIRING
218 | Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
jamaah that in addition to saving family needs also assisted by other families of jamaah
"Someone took turns buying rice, paying for children's pocket money, paying for electricity,
someone picking up my children in school" "Because I did not work, the biggest challenge
that I felt was financial problems, how the children's school fees, electricity, food costs, all
must be considered especially if the husband left quite a long time, overcoming this. I tried
selling hijabs, children's clothes, the robe to fellow Jama'at Tabligh, so caring each other,
"Amir also said that apart from the income that I left, my wife is also running a small
businesses and others were assisted by fellow members of the Jamaah Tabligh who do not
join the da’wah journey . Some people give money, send food, and buy rice, eggs, oil, sugar
and other food ingredients, said Ningsih.
Mrs. Suganda also said that they send food, rice sometimes also helps pay electricity
bills, gives money, varies depending on their ability. Riky admitted that they donated rice,
food ingredients, there were also those who bought clothes for children - my child . For
financial problems is also a problem because school fees for children and meals are
compulsory expenses but assistance from neighbors and other Jamaah very relieves my
burden. The third strategy in dealing with family needs other than mutual help is through
helping one another. Money and food, there are also those who help me in doing homework,
because by chance my child is still young so it is rather difficult to do homework myself. Mr
Mahyar explained that his wife has the role of supporting the family's economic needs. There
is a living from me, incidentally my wife also works, sometimes also assisted by family,
neighbors and other members of the jamaah tabligh community in Gampong even from the
next Gampong, especially if my trip is far and takes a long time , sometimes up to 4 months.
They helped me and my family very much, both in giving money to me, like giving pocket
money to my children, helping to buy rice, sending vegetables and side dishes, even Muslim
members of the Tablighah Society who helped my wife cooking and washing clothes, yes
they help as much as possible a "
To overcome health problems, we found a unique thing that jamaah tabligh worshipers
did not really believe in modern medicine, from the observation "On average each family has
three or four children, even more and the child mortality rate, miscarriage and so on is very
low. The Jama'at themselves rarely go to the doctor unless in very urgent circumstances.
According to them, this is because the practices of the sunnah they are working on make their
wombs strong and fertile. They rarely get sick because they live according to the sunnah of
the Prophet. If unwell, the sunnah treatments are preferred.  Likewise they do not need tertiary
matters which are worldly entertainment as the results of our observations where most houses
DA'WAH EXPERIENCE, SPIRITUAL, AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF
JAMAAH TABLIGH IN LANGSA
Vol. 19. No. 2, Desember 2019 | 219
are still wood-walled or semi-walled, with cement and zinc roofs. There are no TVs, but
electronic equipment such as refrigerators, fans, irons, washing machines and rice cookers
already exist in almost all homes. The furniture in the house is very simple and most of it is
only filled with the Fadilah Amal and Fadilah alms that are in all the houses.
What is done by the family of the Jamaah Tabligh actually shows the commitment of a
da’wah interpreter also in the financial field, to fulfill the tasks and demands of da'wah, then
everything must be facilitated, one of which is property. Assets must be subdued to worship the
da'wah that is carried out in a hearty and generous manner. As disclosed by Hasan Al Banna
quoted by Muhammad Abduh that "if you ask about the property which is infused for their
da'wah, in fact, the treasure is their own little wealth, which they give with full pleasure and
grace. Indeed, they are grateful to Allah if they can increase the sacrifice of their wealth from
merely cutting secondary needs to being able to reduce primary needs so that they can finance
da'wah activities "37 (Abduh 2005). This is also encouraged by the Qur'an in Surat Al-Hasyr
verse 9 which means "... and whoever guarded from his stinginess, they are the lucky ones".
D. CONCLUSION
Jamaah Tabligh in Langsa City carries out da'wah according to the rules made by
Sheikh Maulana Ilyas. The way they preach is persuasive and intruder. For them there is no
day without preaching because da'wah is the duty of every Muslim that must be carried out in
every activity in this world containing da’wah values. Although they have to deal with
various challenges and obstacles that are not easy, but they becomes part of the test of life that
must be passed. The result of their da'wah experiences is an increase in spirituality. They
learn to consistently practice the Sunnah of the Prophet, learn to discipline themselves in
worship and also practice patience because they live with people of different characters, some
are patient and strong, some others are selfish and such. In the course of their da'wah they find
a spiritual sense of love, care and obedience to their worship. The spiritual values also
reinforce their economic resilience in carrying out their da'wah, most of the family's economic
needs are carried out by means of mutual cooperation and mutual assistance among fellow
tabligh family members. In addition, in addressing the needs of the family husband and wife
help each other in meeting family needs. For the Jamaah Tabligh to follow the commands of
Allah by preaching to invite obedience, Allah will fulfill the needs of the afterlife.
37Muhammad Abduh, Memperbaharui Komitmen Dakwah, yang diterjemahkan oleh Uril Bahruddin
dari judul asli “Madza Ya’ni Intimaa’i lid-Da’wah (Jakarta: Robbani Press, 2005)), 168.
MUHAMMAD DAYYAN, AINUN MARDHIAH, MASDALIFAH SEMBIRING
220 | Jurnal Ilmiah ISLAM FUTURA
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abduh, Muhammad. Memperbaharui Komitmen Dakwah. Jakarta: Robbani Press, 2005.
Abdul Mujib and Jusuf Mudzakir. Nuansa-Nuansa Psikologi Islam. Jakarta: Raja Grafindo
Persada, 2001.
Abu, interview by Muhammad Dayyan. Pengalaman Dakwah dan Spiritual Jamaah Tabligh
(August Sunday, 2018).
Agus, Bustanuddin. Agama Dalam Kehidupan Manusia Pengantar Antropologi Agama.
Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada, 2006.
Amar, interview by Muhammad Dayyan. Pengalaman Dakwah dan Spiritual Jamaah Tabligh
(August Wenesday, 2018).
Aziz, Abdul. "The Jamaah Tabligh Movement in Indonesia : Peaceful Fundamentalist." Studi
Islamika, 2004: 467-517.
Aziz, Moh. Ali. Ilmu Dakwah. Jakarta: Prenadamedia Group, 2016.
Gulen, Muhammad Fethullah. Bangkitnya Spiritulitas Islam. Jakarta: Republika, 2012.
Hafifuddin, Didin. "Manajemen Dakwah." In Solusi Islam atas Problemantika Ummat
(Ekonomi, Pendidikan, dan Dakwah), by Adi Sasono, 175. Jakarta: Gema Insani Press,
1998.
Hasanah, Umdatul. "Keberadaan Kelompok Jamaah Tabligh dan Reaksi Masyarakat
(Perspektif Teori Penyebaran Informasi dan Pengaruh)." Indo-Islamika, 2014: 21-40.
Ican, interview by Masdalifah Sembiring. Pengalaman Spiritual dan Ketahanan Ekonomi
Keluarga Jamaah Tabligh (August Friday, 2018).
Imar, interview by Masdalifah Sembiring. Pengalaman Spiritual dan Ketahaan Ekonomi
Keluarga Jamaah Tabligh (August Monday, 2018).
Iwar, interview by Masdalifah Sembiring. Pengalaman Spiritual dan Ketahanan Ekonomi
Keluarga Jamaah Tabligh (Augus Thursday, 2018).
Junaedi, Didi. "Memahami Teks, Melahirkan Konteks: Menelisik Interpretasi Ideologis
Jamaah Tabligh." Journal of Qur’an and Hadith Studies, 2013: 1-17.
Madkhali, Rabi’ bin Hadi Al. Manhaj Da’wah Para Nabi Dengan Landasan Hikmah dan
Rasio. Jakarta: Gema Insani Press, 1995.
Mahyar, interview by Muhammad Dayyan. Pengalaman Dakwah dan Spiritual (August
Wenesday, 2018).
Muhammad, interview by Muhammad Dayyan. Fucus Group Discussion (August Sunday,
2018).
Muktar, interview by Muhammad Dayyan. Pengalaman Spiritual Jamaah Tabligh (August
Thursday, 2018).
Nilhakim. Pemikiran Tokoh Jamaah Tabligh Terhadap Standar Minimal Nafkah Wajib Suami
Kepada Istri (Studi Konstruksi Standar Minimal Nafkah di Desa Mentibar Kecamatan
Paloh Kabupaten Sambas Kalimantan Barat). Master Thesis, Surabaya: Pascasarjana
UIN Sunan Ampel, 2018.
Riki, interview by Muhammad Dayyan. Pengalaman Dakwah dan Spiritual Jamaah Tabligh
(August Thursday, 2018).
Taufik, interview by Muhammad Dayyan. Pengalaman Dakwah dan Spiritual Jamaah
Tabligh (August Monday, 2018).
Udin, interview by Muhammad Dayyan. Pengalaman Dakwah dan Spiritual Jamaah Tabligh
(August Monday, 2018).
Yustina Surani and Indriyati Eko Purwaningsih. "Yustina SurPeran Kecerdasan Spiritualitas
Dan Kecerdasan Emosional Terhadap Kebermaknaan Hidup Pada Suster OSF yang
Purnakarya." Spirits, 2014: 33-46.
Yusuf, M. Yunan. Dakwah Rasulullah Sejarah & Problemantika. Jakarta: Kencana, 2011.
Zulaiha, Siti. "Jamaah Tabligh dalam Perspektif Psikologis." Fokus, 2016: 101-118.
