Profile: A Model for Regional Resilience

University of Minnesota Morris Digital Well 
University of Minnesota Morris Digital Well 
Profile Campus News, Newsletters, and Events 
Spring 2020 
Profile: A Model for Regional Resilience 
Communications and Marketing 
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.morris.umn.edu/profile 
Recommended Citation 
Communications and Marketing, "Profile: A Model for Regional Resilience" (2020). Profile. 58. 
https://digitalcommons.morris.umn.edu/profile/58 
This Book is brought to you for free and open access by the Campus News, Newsletters, and Events at University of 
Minnesota Morris Digital Well. It has been accepted for inclusion in Profile by an authorized administrator of 
University of Minnesota Morris Digital Well. For more information, please contact skulann@morris.umn.edu. 
Profile
For Alumni, Parents, and Friends of the University of Minnesota Morris
Volume XXIV  
Edition II
Winter/Spring 2020
A MODEL FOR 
REGIONAL 
RESILIENCE
MAKING WEST 
CENTRAL MN 
A MORE VIBRANT, 
RESILIENT PLACE
2 A MODEL FOR  
 REGIONAL RESILIENCE
 Donors and friends are helping UMN Morris  
 optimize local resources to make greater Minnesota  
 a more resilient place
12 SMALL TOWN HEROES
 Center for Small Towns pairs students  
 with rural communities to make good  
 things happen
14 MAKING THE HEALTHY CHOICE  
 THE EASY CHOICE
 Morris Healthy Eating increases access to  
 healthy, real foods in rural Minnesota
REGULARS
2 GIVING NEWS
4  CAMPUS NEWS BRIEFS
18 THE BIG PICTURE
20 ALUMNI NEWS
26 CLASS NOTES
30 COUGAR SPORTS NEWS
ON THE COVER: An economic engine and a center for sustainable 
innovation, UMN Morris is finding local solutions to global challenges. 
Thanks to students like Felicia Galvan ’21—and donors like you—we 
are optimizing local resources to make greater Minnesota a more 
sustainable, resilient place. This has never been more important than 
today. We are thinking of you and working hard to be a resource for you 
and our local communities. Keep reading to learn more. 
12
4
2
14
30
GIVING TO MORRIS  
In partnership with the University of Minnesota Foundation, gifts designated 
to UMN Morris are received by and invested in the Morris campus. The 
Foundation serves as the legal, charitable entity for the University system. 
For more information on giving to UMN Morris, contact:
Susan Schmidgall, director of advancement 
320-589-6160 |  sschmidg@morris.umn.edu
Bill Robb, senior development officer 
320-589-6387 |  billrobb@morris.umn.edu
Erin Christensen, development officer 
320-589-6067 |  erinc@morris.umn.edu
Jennifer Zych Herrmann, development officer 
320-589-6048 | zychja@morris.umn.edu
Profile
Winter/Spring 2020
Volume XXIV, Edition II
Editorial Staff
Allison Friedly ’04, director of communications  
and marketing
Kari Adams ’03, graphic artist
Jenna Reiser Ray ’10, public relations and internal 
communications specialist
Leah Christian ’23, student photographer
Funded in part by the University of Minnesota Morris 
Alumni Association and the Office of the Chancellor, 
Profile is published twice per year. Alternative formats 
are available upon request.
Update your address at 
alumni.morris.umn.edu/stay-connected  
320-589-6066  
alumni@morris.umn.edu
The University of Minnesota Foundation is a 501(c)(3) 
tax-exempt organization soliciting tax-deductible private 
contributions for the University of Minnesota. Financial 
and other information about University of Minnesota 
Foundation’s purpose, programs, and activities may be 
obtained by contacting the Chief Financial Officer at 
200 Oak Street SE, Suite 500, Minneapolis, MN 55455 
(612) 624-3333, or for residents of the following states, 
as stated below. Maryland: For the cost of postage 
and copying, from the Secretary of State. Michigan: 
MICS No. 50198. New Jersey: INFORMATION FILED 
WITH THE ATTORNEY GENERAL CONCERNING THIS 
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION AND THE PERCENTAGE 
OF CONTRIBUTIONS RECEIVED BY THE CHARITY 
DURING THE LAST REPORTING PERIOD THAT WERE 
DEDICATED TO THE CHARITABLE PURPOSE MAY 
BE OBTAINED FROM THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
OF THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY BY CALLING (973) 
504-6215 AND IS AVAILABLE ON THE INTERNET AT 
www.njconsumeraffairs.gov/charity. New York: Upon 
request, from the Attorney General Charities Bureau, 
120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271. Pennsylvania: 
The official registration and financial information of 
University of Minnesota Foundation may be obtained 
from the Pennsylvania Department of State by calling 
toll-free, within Pennsylvania, 1-800-732-0999. Virginia: 
From the State Office of Consumer Affairs in the 
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs, P.O. 
Box 1163, Richmond, VA 23218. Washington: From the 
Secretary of State at 1-800-332-4483. The registration 
required by the state charitable solicitation act is on 
file with the Secretary of State’s office. West Virginia: 
West Virginia residents may obtain a summary of 
the registration and financial documents from the 
Secretary of State, State Capitol, Charleston, WV 
25305. CONTRIBUTIONS ARE DEDUCTIBLE FOR 
FEDERAL INCOME TAX PURPOSES IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH APPLICABLE LAW. REGISTRATION IN A STATE 
DOES NOT IMPLY ENDORSEMENT, APPROVAL, OR 
RECOMMENDATION OF UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA 
FOUNDATION BY THE STATE.
Profile Mission
Profile connects alumni and friends of the University 
of Minnesota Morris with informative, engaging, and 
enjoyable stories about campus life and beyond 
that reflect the value and success of the liberal arts 
education model, enabling our audience to act as 
proud advocates of the institution they know and love.
Generous scholarship donors and deserving recipients came 
together for our first Salute to Scholarships event this fall. 
Gifts to support scholarships provide life-changing student 
experiences and create opportunities for future teachers, 
doctors, lawyers, and innovators. They also ensure the future 
of the region. Keep reading to learn more about the impact of 
philanthropy on regional resilience. 
giving news
2 University of Minnesota Morris
A MODEL FOR REGIONAL RESILIENCE
An economic engine and a center for sustainable innovation, the University of Minnesota Morris is finding local solutions to global 
challenges. A public land-grant institution grounded in its sense of place, the campus is a regional center for education, culture, and 
research. Through our A model for living and learning campaign, we are optimizing private giving to make greater Minnesota a more 
sustainable, resilient place—thanks to our donors and friends.
“When the Erik Torgerson family made the gift of land 
that is now the EcoStation, I saw in their generosity 
and vision the promise to excite in others the desire 
to learn in the context of social and moral purpose 
and environmental stewardship. My family’s gift is 
made in the belief that the realization of this vision 
will allow future generations to experience the 
wonders of the natural world and to contribute to  
its endurance.”
—Jacqueline R. Johnson
“Our father would have loved the 
EcoStation. It provides students with 
a setting in which to do research and 
develop the problem-solving skills and 
perspectives that humanity needs to 
address the environmental challenges 
that lie ahead. It is an educational 
foundation that gives us hope for 
future generations.”
—Briggs Family
“Those of working in agriculture know 
we need to be ever-better stewards 
of the land. The EcoStation and 
future EcoCenter, with UMN Morris’s 
leadership and innovative programs, 
can lead the way to immense results. 
The chance for students, faculty, and 
the public to learn, experiment, and 
collaborate in ‘the real (natural) world’ 
is priceless.”
—Trites Rolle ’95
EDUCATION: THE ECOCENTER AT THE ECOSTATION
Thanks to donors’ vision and generosity, we are creating an environment where students play a pivotal role in solving the problems facing 
our world. That environment, the EcoStation, is a resource for the campus community and a research platform for the benefit of all. Its 
EcoCenter facility will affirm the vision for the EcoStation as a premier learning laboratory. Drawing power and beauty from the woods 
in which it sits, the EcoCenter will empower the people of Minnesota to preserve the prairie environment. And it was made possible by 
donor generosity.
Donors like Chancellor Emerita Jacqueline R. Johnson, who joined the founding donors in making their bold vision real. Donors  
like the Helen Briggs family, stewards of our first chief administrator’s legacy. And Jessica Trites Rolle ’95, a loyal alumna with an eye  
on sustainability.
Johnson with the Torgerson family at the dedication of the 
EcoStation in 2015
giving news
3Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
Performing arts are alive and well in west central Minnesota, 
thanks to an investment from the Otto Bremer Trust (OBT) for 
the renovation of Edson Auditorium in the Edward J. and Helen 
Jane Morrison Performing Arts Center. Since 1992 the Student 
Center has been the campus community center. And at its heart is 
Edson Auditorium, a 500-seat auditorium crucial to the success 
of community events. OBT’s investment builds on its previous 
investments in the campus—and those of other donors and 
friends—to complete a yearlong transformation of this premier 
performance space.
“The Edson Auditorium is a vital community gathering 
space for Morris and the surrounding area. We are 
pleased to have played a role in its renovation,  
which assures continued community engagement 
through meetings, gatherings, and events that take 
place there.”
—Daniel Reardon, co-CEO and trustee, 
Otto Bremer Trust
THE CHALLENGE AHEAD
The University of Minnesota is driven by belief 
in a better tomorrow. That means finding 
local solutions to issues facing rural areas: 
limited transportation, shifting demographics, 
a changing agriculture industry, and more. 
Because of our location and community 
partnerships, we are uniquely situated to 
reimagine the future of rural America. We  
are going to do that with our forthcoming  
Morris Challenge.
A competition open to all—students, faculty, and 
other thought leaders—the Morris Challenge will 
uncover practical and affordable solutions to 
the grand challenges facing rural places. Teams 
will demonstrate practical, effective, actionable 
solutions to real-world issues.
“The University of Minnesota Morris is 
perfectly positioned to drive rural vitality. 
With partners and friends, we will put 
our location, resources, and educational 
values to work finding bold new solutions 
to rural challenges.”
—Chancellor Michelle Behr
To learn more,  
contact Director of Advancement  
Susan Schmidgall today:  
sschmidg@morris.umn.edu  
or 320-589-6160
RESEARCH: RODNEY A. BRIGGS LIBRARY
The Morris campus is situated on original Anishinaabe (Ojibwe) 
and Dakota and Lakota (Sioux) homelands, and its first buildings 
housed an American Indian Boarding School. Sharing stories 
of the people who lived and learned on these grounds is vital to 
moving forward in a good way. Now the campus library’s ability 
to do so is stronger, thanks to Paulette Fairbanks Molin ’66. A 
member of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe from the White Earth 
Reservation and UMN Morris’s first Native American graduate, 
Molin has made an invaluable gift of books and other materials 
that enhance Briggs’ collection and preserve indigenous stories  
for us all.
“Keeping Briggs Library and other regional assets 
strong is fundamental to sustainable growth and 
innovative development in a rapidly changing 
world. UMN Morris’s role is to make it all possible, 
providing a knowledge-based foundation and vibrant 
stewardship as well as an excellent launching pad.”
—Paulette Fairbanks Molin ’66
CULTURE: EDWARD J. AND HELEN JANE MORRISON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER
The renovation of Edson Auditorium has improved the 
presentation of events for both student groups, like the  
United Students for Africa (International Fashion Show), and 
big-name performers, like Performing Arts Series act David 
L. Harris, both shown above. Audiences and performers alike 
enjoy an improved experience, thanks to donors like the Otto 
Bremer Trust.
4 University of Minnesota Morris
campus news
CLASS OF 2023 IS TALENTED AND DIVERSE
30% 
AMERICAN
INDIAN
FROM
MINNESOTA
12% 
US STUDENTS
OF COLOR*
37% 
PELL GRANT
RECIPIENTS
The campus welcomed 406 new students this fall: 322 are new first-year students, and 84 are transfer students (up 17% 
over last fall). 
*identifying as Asian, African American/Black, and Hispanic
76% 
INTERNATIONAL
STUDENTS
AVERAGE
ACT SCORE
FROM OTHER 
US STATES
2% 
25
22% 40% 
FIRST-GENERATION
STUDENTS
C
LA
SS
 O
F 
20
23
 B
Y
 T
H
E 
N
U
M
B
ER
S
JANET SCHRUNK ERICKSEN NAMED 
VICE CHANCELLOR FOR ACADEMIC 
AFFAIRS AND DEAN
The University of 
Minnesota Morris has 
named Janet Schrunk 
Ericksen vice chancellor 
for academic affairs and 
dean. An internationally 
recognized medieval 
scholar, Ericksen has served the Morris campus since 1998. She 
has been the interim vice chancellor for academic affairs and dean 
since 2017.
As interim vice chancellor and dean, Ericksen successfully 
authored two grants: a Fulbright Scholar-in-Residence proposal 
to bring an early childhood education expert to Morris in 
collaboration with the West Central Initiative and an Andrew W. 
Mellon Foundation Governors’ grant (“Engaged and Engaging 
Humanities”). In addition, she served as principal investigator on 
an existing Margaret A Cargill Philanthropies grant (“Sustainability 
Leaders for the Future”). She worked collaboratively with others 
on campus to restructure several campus units to better coordinate 
student services. And she implemented new programming to 
support early career faculty.
Ericksen began her career at UMN Morris in 1998 as an 
assistant professor of English. Since then she has held a variety of 
administrative roles, including director of the Honors Program, 
chair of the Division of the Humanities, and interim chair of the 
Division of the Social Sciences. Additionally, she has been an active 
participant in University of Minnesota governance, including as 
a University Senator and two terms as a member of the Faculty 
Consultative Committee.
Ericksen recently authored a forthcoming University of 
Toronto Press monograph, Reading Old English Biblical Poetry: The Book 
and the Poem in Junius 11. A University of Minnesota Morris Alumni 
Association Teaching Award- and Horace T. Morse-Minnesota 
Alumni Association Award-winning teacher and member of the 
UMN Academy of Distinguished Teaching, she also continues to be 
active in the classroom and as a faculty advisor.
“I look forward to Janet’s continued leadership in support of 
our mission and vision,” says Chancellor Michelle Behr. “Her deep 
understanding of the Morris campus and community will help us 
to achieve our aspirations.”
Ericksen will assume the role on July 1, 2020, subject to 
approval of the Board of Regents.
5Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
campus news
MELISSA BERT NAMED INTERIM VICE 
CHANCELLOR FOR ENROLLMENT 
MANAGEMENT
Melissa Bert, EdD, 
will serve as interim 
vice chancellor for 
enrollment management 
(VCEM). The role of 
the VCEM is to work 
with campus partners 
to achieve big-picture 
enrollment outcomes on 
campus and is part of a 
larger plan to reimagine 
enrollment management 
at UMN Morris. Bert has 
served as the campus’s 
first senior director of institutional effectiveness since 2015 (and 
will continue in this capacity). There she has provided insight 
to support strategic planning, assessment and program review, 
accreditation, and more.
CAMPUS VOTING UP IN 2018 
Voting on campus was up in the 2018 election, increasing from 
31.2% in 2014 to 51.4%. The national average for student voter 
turnout in 2018 was 39.1%. UMN Morris’s rates earned the 
campus a platinum seal at the 2019 ALL IN Challenge Awards 
Ceremony. The ALL IN Campus Democracy Challenge is a 
nonpartisan, national initiative recognizing and supporting 
campuses as they work to increase nonpartisan democratic 
engagement and full student voter participation. The Challenge 
encourages higher education institutions to help students 
form the habits of active and informed citizenship, and make 
democratic participation a core value on their campus.
HIGHER LEARNING COMMISSION  
ON CAMPUS
The Higher Learning Commission visited UMN Morris in 
October as part of the campus’s regular ten-year reaccreditation 
process. UMN Morris last received reaffirmation of accreditation in 
2010, and has been accredited continually since 1970. 
The two-day HLC visit was conducted by a five-member team 
of peer reviewers. In addition to requested meetings with specific 
campus offices, the team provided opportunities for faculty, staff, 
and students to discuss how the Morris campus meets each of the 
five HLC Criteria: 
Mission
Integrity: Ethical and Responsible Conduct
Teaching and Learning: Quality, Resources, and Support
Teaching and Learning: Evaluation and Improvement
Resources, Planning, and Institutional Effectiveness
FIVE UMN MORRIS STUDENTS ARE 
FULBRIGHT SEMIFINALISTS 
Five University of Minnesota Morris students submitted 
Fulbright applications this year. And all have been  
named semifinalists:
 • Sarah Severson ’20, chemistry/English  
  (Study/Research, Spain)
 • Mara Christensen ’20, elementary education  
  (English Teaching Assistant, Korea)
 • Trina Vue ’20, English  
  (English Teaching Assistant, Thailand)
 • Anika Paulson ’20, psychology  
  (English Teaching Assistant, Germany)
 • Mia King ’19, biology/psychology/Spanish  
  (Public Health English Teaching Assistant, Spain)
Final awards will be announced later this year. 
“As one of the country’s top public liberal arts colleges, 
UMN Morris provides talented students access to life-
changing educational opportunities,” said Chancellor 
Michelle Behr. “Our exceptional students are prepared to 
live as engaged global citizens.”
UMN Morris had two Fulbright finalists in spring 2019: 
 • Rayann Wilmot ’19, sociology  
  (English Teaching Assistant, Spain)
 • Drewe Jefferson ’16, English  
  (English Teaching Assistant, Germany)
Five students were named semifinalists: Emily Kuehn, 
Jacob Miller, Jefferson, Wilmot, and Mia King.
The Fulbright U.S. Student Program is the largest  
United States exchange program offering opportunities 
for students and young professionals to undertake 
international graduate study, advanced research,  
university teaching, and primary and secondary school 
teaching worldwide. The competition is administered  
on campus through the Academic Center for Enrichment. 
6 University of Minnesota Morris
campus news
#WELCOMNGABEL: 
MORRIS HOSTS NEW UMN PRESIDENT
University of Minnesota President Joan T.A. Gabel 
visited the Morris campus in September, following 
her inauguration in the Twin Cities. While in town she 
met with faculty, staff, students, and alumni, getting to 
know all that UMN Morris has to offer. 
ABOUT PRESIDENT GABEL
Joan T.A. Gabel is the 17th president of the University 
of Minnesota. She leads the University’s mission 
by honoring its legacy as a place of discovery and 
opportunity, while emphasizing solutions inspired 
by Minnesotans that serve our state and change the 
world. Learn more at president.umn.edu
7Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
campus news
I went to a liberal arts college of similar 
size, so, personally, I feel a lot of affinity to 
the way in which instruction happens here. 
The way in which faculty and students 
work together here is a very happy 
reminder of a really wonderful experience 
that I had and that I think has served me 
very well, so I feel inspired by that. We’re 
doing it better and better, and doing it in a 
way that is accessible, because it’s public 
and, therefore, has a lot of affordability, 
and fulfills a really important role within 
the System as a whole, as the liberal arts 
college component.
—President Gabel on UMN Morris, 
Voice of Alexandria”
“
Get to know members of our community who are 
making a difference in Greater MN
CAROL ZURN ’20, CHASKA
Van Alstine Geology & Environmental  
Science Scholarship 
FAVORITE CAMPUS MOMENT:  
Anytime I get to hang out with my friends  
and relax, watch a movie, talk about whatever 
is on our minds, that is my favorite moment.
WHAT’S THE BIGGEST REGIONAL  
PROBLEM YOU WANT TO SOLVE? 
There is a disregard for the waste that  
we produce, especially runoff, and how  
that affects people and ecosystems 
downstream. Nothing just goes away— 
we make an impact on ecosystems and  
other people, and we need to understand  
that and take steps to reduce our negative 
impact on the environment. 
ARGIE MANOLIS
Director of Civic Learning and Engagement
NUMBER OF YEARS ON CAMPUS: 20
FAVORITE CAMPUS MOMENT:  
Receiving a letter from a student I’d had  
10 years earlier telling me how my class  
had changed her life.
WHAT’S THE BIGGEST REGIONAL  
PROBLEM YOU WANT TO SOLVE? 
Developing welcoming communities  
for newcomers and immigrants to small,  
rural communities.
SHELBY LOBERG
Assistant Professor of Biology
NUMBER OF YEARS ON CAMPUS: 4
FAVORITE CAMPUS MOMENT:  
Cheering on the new graduates before  
they begin their processional.
WHAT’S THE BIGGEST REGIONAL  
PROBLEM YOU WANT TO SOLVE? 
Understanding where ticks are and why,  
to help prevent tick-borne illnesses 
KIMBERLY HILAND-BELDING ’01
Speech Communication major,
Senior Technical Writer, Fundraising  
and Community Advocacy Volunteer
FAVORITE CAMPUS MOMENT:  
Walking to campus after class-shuttering 
blizzards and shoveling out the door  
before my Random Sunday Morning  
radio show on KUMM.
HOW ARE YOU MAKING UMN MORRIS  
A MODEL FOR REGIONAL RESILIENCE? 
I started investing in UMN Morris as a way  
to give back. Time and experience revealed 
UMN Morris is an incubator for complete 
people and a whole-picture perspective.  
The way this campus harnesses both the  
wind and the concept of building sustainability 
into ordinary life is an essential foundation 
for people entering a world still struggling to 
adapt to the 21st century. 
10 University of Minnesota Morris
The early-autumn sun was out in full force for Homecoming 2019. Alumni and friends 
enjoyed a little late-season heat wave along with food, fun, and friends old and new. 
SAVE THE DATE FOR HOMECOMING 2020, OCTOBER 9–11
HOME SWEET HOME
11Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
HOME SWEET HOME
12 University of Minnesota Morris
Like most city kids, Felicia Galvan ’21 knew nothing 
about farm equipment. The University of Minnesota Morris 
anthropology major had been interested in growing and preparing 
healthful foods since high school, when she joined a Native youth 
gardening program. But tractors and plows? Not so much.
That changed this past year, when Galvan, a junior from the 
Twin Cities area, applied for a student internship with the Center 
for Small Towns. The center paired her with Red Lake nonprofit 
4-Directions Development, which tasked her with finding out 
which kinds of farm equipment would be best for starting a 1- to 
2-acre family farm. The results of her research will be used at the 
Red Lake Reservation training garden, where community members 
learn about different farming practices. The ongoing goal is to 
increase access to fresh, organic produce, ultimately achieving 
“food sovereignty,” or the ability to grow enough food to feed every 
Red Lake tribal member. 
“I learned a lot about farming equipment,” Galvan says. “That 
was a huge learning curve.” She also attended farming conferences, 
where she met Minnesota farmers who became informal advisors.
SMALL TOWN HEROES
Center for Small Towns pairs      students with rural communities to make good things happen
The Center for Small Towns (CST) has been matching 
students like Galvan with Minnesota community groups for 25 
years. Towns with populations of 5,000 or fewer have access to 
the talent and resources at UMN Morris, and students get an 
opportunity to apply their classroom learning to solving real-
world problems and strengthen their connections to greater 
Minnesota. In spring 2019, CST put 28 students to work on 24 
projects around the state.
The projects are diverse—everything from gathering 
community health data to analyzing the need for a new community 
center to creating after-school programs for kids. In some cases, 
students work as research assistants on faculty projects.
“We are serving communities in a pretty broad range of places 
and spaces,” says Argie Manolis, director of civic learning and 
engagement. “A former staff member of the center used to say, ‘If 
you know one small town, you know one small town.’ That’s why 
we encourage students to do the work of understanding the big 
picture—the history and the people who live there—and not just the 
project they’re working on.”
If y
ou know o e smal  town, you know o e small  town
.
13Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
SMALL TOWN HEROES
Center for Small Towns pairs      students with rural communities to make good things happen
Service Meets Learning
The center started out doing research on small towns, but 
results from early focus groups revealed that communities didn’t 
want to be studied; they wanted help with retaining economic 
and social vitality, promotion and marketing, and technology. So 
the focus shifted to community requests. Student learning, now 
equally important, took a backseat.
Today, each community designs and directs the project and 
determines the student’s role. CST finds a student who’s the 
right fit. Galvan, for example, had gardening and food co-op 
experience, and her mother’s family is from the White Earth 
Reservation. Her interest in Native foods made her an especially 
good match.
In addition to valuable work experience, students come away 
with a less tangible but equally important benefit. “Students’ ideas 
about small towns and small-town life really get turned on their 
heads,” Manolis says.
This is true of students from larger cities, several of whom 
have remained in rural communities after graduation, and small-
town students, who may be self-conscious about coming from a 
place whose name their friends don’t recognize. “They learn that 
the rural-urban divide isn’t what it appears to be in the media, 
and that rural communities have this incredible capacity to create 
change,” she says.
The center promotes student success in another important 
way—by helping them pay for their education. All internships are 
paid, and all are entirely funded by grants and gifts. 
“We’re incredibly reliant on donor funding,” Manolis says. 
“And we are very appreciative when one of our alumni chooses to 
donate, because we know that they finally are in a position where 
they can support work that was important to them.”
As for Galvan, she says her yearlong internship gave her an 
appreciation of Minnesota’s tight-knit farming community and 
rekindled her interest in working the land. Is farming in her 
post-college future? “I keep getting thrown into this farming work 
somehow,” she says with a laugh, “so maybe there’s something 
there. Even if I don’t become a farmer, I definitely think that I will 
still be in circles where I will try my best to support and advocate 
for their work.”
This story originally ran in the fall 2019 issue of Legacy, 
a University of Minnesota Foundation publication. It was 
written by Laura Silver, a Minneapolis writer. Photo by  
Doug Beasley.
If y
ou know o e smal  town, you know o e small  town
.
14 University of Minnesota Morris
MAKING THE HEALTHY CHOICE 
THE EASY CHOICE
National Problem, Local Solution
About half of American adults (more than 100 million) 
have one or more preventable chronic diseases, many of which 
are related to unhealthy eating and a lack of physical activity. 
Meanwhile, obesity affects almost one in five children, and one in 
four children from lower socioeconomic groups.
And while the norm is to fault the individual, national 
research shows that comprehensive changes in a food environment 
can increase healthy eating for a whole community. In rural areas, 
especially, Americans are four times less likely to have access to a 
healthy food retailer than those who live in urban areas.
In Stevens County—home to some of the richest agricultural 
land in the state—the potential seemed limitless.
What if the Healthy Choice Were the Easy Choice?
Mary Jo Forbord, a registered dietitian and coordinator of 
the Morris Healthy Eating Initiative at UMN Morris, started 
building an answer to that question. Working closely with citizens 
and organizations within Morris and Stevens County (like SNAP 
Ed, Stevens County Food Shelf, farmers, and the library), she 
created educational programs about nutrition and helped make 
fresh fruits and vegetables and other healthy foods more accessible 
and affordable.
In an impromptu kitchen 
inside the public library in 
the west central community 
of Morris, Minnesota, food 
sizzles in a frying pan while 
a boy of about 7 pokes at his 
plate, separating the “good” 
foods from the “bad.” The mushrooms, notably, have migrated 
on the plate to a spot all their own, and that is where they will stay 
(He’s never actually tried mushrooms, but is convinced he doesn’t 
like them).
Despite being a library, the place is anything but quiet. 
Children are busy slicing, dicing, and smashing vegetables on 
cutting boards with plastic knives they’ve been provided through a 
program called Taste Buds, which teaches kids about cooking and 
nutrition through hands-on experience.
Just outside on the library lawn, the Morris Area Farmers 
Market bustles with fresh food and goods grown or produced 
locally by the residents of Stevens County.
Both Taste Buds and the farmers market, as well as a number 
of other programs, are part of the Morris Healthy Eating 
Initiative, which began 10 years ago with a simple question: “What 
if the healthy choice were the easy choice?”
15Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
“I’ve been told that no matter what the question is, my answer 
is always ‘food,’” says Forbord, who is also an organic farmer.
Forbord says that the initiative is fostering a community 
dialogue on the benefits of eating healthier, expanding gardening 
and farmers markets, and educating residents (especially kids) in 
how to prepare healthier food.
“By organizing and building a welcoming and vibrant market, 
we are succeeding in encouraging more farmers to become 
vendors and more community members to become customers, all 
of which strengthens the local economy,” says Forbord.
But the real payoff may be in future generations: by pairing 
kids with University students in all things food, kids are getting 
interested in food and their own health, says Forbord.
Growing a Generation of Healthy Eaters
Back inside the library, student Erin Kiyukanpi is 
demonstrating a stir-fry—mushrooms included—as part of today’s 
Taste Buds programming. While kids get misty-eyed cutting 
onions (many for the first time), Kiyukanpi is explaining how 
carrots, peppers, and other vegetables taste and why they might 
add them to the stir-fry.
Kiyukanpi, a member of the Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate 
tribe, has been cooking for years. He’s a nontraditional student 
with plenty of work experience under his belt, especially in food 
service. Most recently he was food manager at a K-12 tribal school. 
Today, his own son, 8, is here watching the demonstrations with 
other kids.
Kiyukanpi, a Native American and indigenous studies 
major with a minor in sustainability leadership, points out that 
“Kiyukanpi” in Dakota means “makes room for him/them,” and 
that, essentially, is how he sees his role here: he excels at making 
the kids feel comfortable.
“Kids ask a lot of questions and try a lot of foods they 
wouldn’t normally try. When you get on their level, take a knee 
with them and explain things—the benefits of the plant and where 
it comes from, the different tastes ... they appreciate that and are 
open to trying new things,” says Kiyukanpi, who after graduation 
hopes to put his experience to work in the tribal community.
“Some kids come and make the food but won’t try anything … 
but they’re here, putting their hands in it—getting that exposure. 
And I think they realize that cooking can be fun—interesting and 
colorful and easy,” he says.
On the other hand, says Forbord, “We’re finding that a lot 
of the time kids will lead the way … and their parents are standing 
back saying, ‘oh, they won’t eat that, don’t give them too much’ 
and the kids are going, ‘Hey, I helped make that!’”
Nearby, Esmira Alieva ’19 helps a little girl of about 3 tuck in 
a new recipe and add a sticker to a recipe book each child keeps. 
Stickers seem to be a key recipe book ingredient, especially for the 
smaller kids.
Every week it’s a new recipe: strawberry salsa, garlic-scape 
pesto, and this week, stir-fry, says Alieva. As part of the program, 
she and half a dozen other students work with the children on 
topics from cooking to nutrition and gardening.
“You have to make it exciting for them just to get them to 
even touch the mushrooms,” says Alieva. For many, the very 
presence of the college students is enough excitement.
“The kids love the University students—they hang on their 
every word. And if the college students eat that, and they think it’s 
good ... the kids are in. It’s really quite a wondrous thing to see,” 
says Forbord
But the program’s effectiveness is also aided because 
the children are invested: they’ve actually grown many of the 
vegetables they are using in gardens of their own—little plots 
of land, each just a few square feet that they can call their own, 
provided by the University of Minnesota’s West Central Research 
and Outreach Center. Each child plants the same things (radishes, 
lettuce, beans, strawberries, and more), and every week they come 
to harvest.
“They harvested radishes last week,” says Forbord. “You talk 
about excitement—many of them had never pulled anything out 
of the ground before—and they were going to eat them no matter 
what, because they grew them,” she says.
Forbord says that familiarizing kids with a variety of fruits 
and vegetables when they are young will help them become better 
eaters and healthier people in the future.
“For so long, people have lamented, oh, nobody cooks 
anymore, nobody knows what to do with vegetables,” says Forbord.
She and the community of Morris are helping change that by 
growing the next generation of healthy eaters.
This story originally ran on UMNews. It was written by Adam 
Overland, principal editor/writer, University Relations, UMN 
Twin Cities.
I’ve been told 
that no matter 
what the question 
is, my answer is 
always ‘food.’
—MaryJo Forbord”
“
Erin Kiyukanpi demonstrates stir-fry techniques during the 
Taste Buds program at the Morris Public Library.
16 University of Minnesota Morris
photovoltaic 
panels
prairie
restoration
gravel
roadway
parking
trails
Pete’s Bay
EcoCenter
N
covered porch
wrap-around deck575 
square-foot 
outdoor 
classroom
“The Tree  
House”
4,000 
square feet
Located on a previously-tilled hilltop 
on the 140-acre EcoStation grounds, 
the EcoCenter will overlook restored 
and native prairie and woodlands. 
footbridge
nature trails
Thanks to the vision of generous donors, we have space to create a new  
environment where students play a pivotal role in solving the problems  
facing our world. Built on land given to UMN Morris, the evolving  
EcoStation (with its proposed EcoCenter facility) is an environmental  
resource for the campus community and a research platform  
for the benefit of all. Find out how we’re turning a virtually  
untouched tract of land into a fully operational signature  
platform for UMN in its quest to tackle  
today’s grand challenges.
WISE USE OF A LIVING LABORATORY: 
THE ECOCENTER AT THE ECOSTATION
17Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
0
net-zero
energy usewrap-around deck
fireplace/ 
wood stove
classroom/lab,
commons
resource room,
bathrooms with showers
Study
prairie restoration
Here are a few of the ways students, faculty, staff, and 
regional partners utilize the EcoStation to conduct 
research, instruction, and outreach as a model for 
living and learning. The addition of the EcoCenter will 
foster a culture of exploration and innovation  
and contribute to an appreciation of and respect for 
the environment.
 • Meteorological data collection
 • Glacial Geology class
 • Earthworm research
 • Tree canopy research
 • Herbarium specimen collection
 • Jazz Band retreat
 • Environmental Imagination class
 • Human Resource Management class with  
  sustainability focus
 • Flora/fauna surveys
 • Soil sampling
 • Elementary school fall nature experience
Thanks to the vision of generous donors, we have space to create a new  
environment where students play a pivotal role in solving the problems  
facing our world. Built on land given to UMN Morris, the evolving  
EcoStation (with its proposed EcoCenter facility) is an environmental  
resource for the campus community and a research platform  
for the benefit of all. Find out how we’re turning a virtually  
untouched tract of land into a fully operational signature  
platform for UMN in its quest to tackle  
today’s grand challenges.
WISE USE OF A LIVING LABORATORY: 
THE ECOCENTER AT THE ECOSTATION
18 University of Minnesota Morris
THE BIG 
PICTURE
Each January the Office of Community 
Engagement leads us in a day of service 
and action—making the Dr. Martin 
Luther King Jr. holiday a day on (not 
off)! This year volunteers focused on 
youth programming, inspiring area 
elementary students with ideas for civic 
engagement and social justice.
19Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
20 University of Minnesota Morris
university of minnesota morris alumni association
MEET YOUR NEW DIRECTOR OF 
ALUMNI ENGAGEMENT 
JENNIFER ZYCH HERRMANN ’00
Jennifer Zych Herrmann ’00 will take on the role of Director of Alumni 
Engagement. The position combines alumni relations leadership with 
development work. Jen has an MA in educational policy and administration 
from UMN Twin Cities and a BA in music from UMN Morris. She is pursuing a 
PhD at UMN Twin Cities.
Wondering what Jen loves most about UMN Morris?  
Here’s what she had to say! 
FAVORITE PLACE ON CAMPUS: 
I have had the privilege of seeing our campus grow and change for over two 
decades, so I’m tempted to tell you about all of the new places and updates that 
some of you haven’t seen—but I won’t spoil the surprise. You’ll have to come 
back and see for yourself! With so many lovely spaces on campus, it was hard to 
decide, but I have to say that the mall is my favorite place on campus. Every time 
I see students studying or playing on the bright green grass, or see the golden 
fall sunshine filter around the Student Center and through the trees, my heart is 
filled with the memories of people who were and are so important in my life and 
helped shape who I am today. It’s fun to see how today’s UMN Morris students 
have carried on past traditions while making their own. I get to hear their stories, 
and I’m so glad that they’re making their own lifelong memories and valuable 
connections, just as you and I did.
FAVORITE CAMPUS MEMORY: 
I was the president of the UMN Morris Jazz Ensembles in the late 1990s and 
had so much fun and learned a lot about leadership from being a part of this 
organization and working with our director, Jim “Doc” Carlson. Our concerts 
were so high energy, whether we were playing in the Recital Hall, on tour in 
New Orleans, or performing at the Montreux Jazz Festival. I have to think our 
uniform of black sweaters with the bright U-M-M Jazz logo, combined with the 
’70s-style collared shirts we wore underneath, had a lot to do with it. Or maybe it 
was the camaraderie all of the musicians built at the “Social Skills Workshop” get-
togethers we had after each concert. 
WHY UMN MORRIS? 
When I meet a new person and discover that they’re a University of Minnesota 
Morris alum, I often say, “I knew I liked you!” There’s just something about a 
UMN Morris grad! And it’s not just me who thinks so. I hear so many stories 
about the leadership, accomplishments, and meaningful impact of our alums, 
often ending with some statement like “ and of course they went to Morris” or 
“those Morris people are some of the smartest people I ever met.” It makes me 
smile. As people fortunate enough to be a part of the UMN Morris community, 
we have had the chance to learn and grow with talented, caring, and down-to-
earth students, faculty, and staff in an environment that allowed us to think 
deeply, create meaningful relationships, and develop the confidence to take on 
important challenges. Not everybody gets to be part of such an environment, but I 
think our world would be all the better if there were more UMN Morris graduates 
out there, leading the way. So don’t keep UMN Morris a secret—spread the word!
2016 HOMECOMING
CA. 2000 ADMISSIONS PUBLICATION
THE MALL IN 2019
JENNIFER ZYCH HERRMANN ’00
21Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
university of minnesota morris alumni association
ERIKA BAILEY-JOHNSON ’99, UMMAA PRESIDENT
Boozhoo, Morris campus community. I am honored to take on the role of UMMAA 
President for this next year. I bring up my UMN Morris experience at least once a week. 
The latest conversation was around pottery, and I reflected on my memorable experience 
in Kevin Flicker’s ceramics class. I also love sharing stories of working with my herpetology 
professor, Dr. Hoppe (yes, that was his name!). My advisor, Dr. Kuchenreuther, taught 
me so many life lessons that I am now sharing with my students (she’s still doing her magic 
at UMN Morris, by the way). The college experience is transformative, and it’s important 
for us all to reflect on our UMN Morris experiences throughout our lives. I have so much 
gratitude for the place and people; one that I can never fully reciprocate. I met my future 
husband at Morris (we’ll be married 22 years this June). I met forever-friends at Morris. 
I was able to be a college athlete at Morris. I learned time management and how to write a 
research paper and where to buy the world’s best grilled cheese. It would be fun to connect 
with you sometime in the next year to hear your memories and stories. Miigwech.
 
UMMAA BOARD OF 
DIRECTORS
Erika Bailey-Johnson ’99,  
 president
Gina Brunko-Marquez ’94
Jon Dalager ’79,  
 first vice president
Randy Koopman ’78
Jena Magee ’09
Dillon McBrady ’13,  
 immediate past president
Ann Miller ’87
Elizabeth Thoma Torkelson ’11
Ryan Vettleson ’98
OFFICE OF ALUMNI 
RELATIONS
Jennifer Zych Herrmann ’00 
 director of alumni engagement
Clori Carlsen 
 principal office and administrative  
 specialist
Gwen Rollofson ’99 
 executive office and administrative  
 specialist
alumni@morris.umn.edu 
320-589-6066 
alumni.morris.umn.edu
UPCOMING ALUMNI EVENTS
TBD Saint Paul Saints Game
CHS Field, Saint Paul
TBD Alumni in the Archives
July 10 Cougar Alumni Golf Classic
Pomme de Terre Golf Club, Morris
October 9–11 Homecoming 2020
October 9–11
Class of 1970 50th Reunion
Classes of 1970–79 invited to this 70s 
decade reunion
For the most current event information, visit  
alumni.morris.umn.edu/opportunities-connect.  
Events take place on campus unless otherwise noted. 
A note from Alumni Relations:
As this issue of Profile goes to press we find ourselves 
adjusting to a new normal. Due to COVID-19 precautions, we 
aren’t able to host some of our annual events, such as Jazz 
Fest and Commencement.  
What hasn’t changed is our commitment to you. As we 
all refocus on what truly matters, we are reminded of the 
strength of the University of Minnesota Morris community 
and the strong bond that more than 23,000 of us share. We 
wish you, your family, and your friends good health and look 
forward to the next time we can be together. Until then, don’t 
hesitate to reach out if we can be means of support or a 
resource for you.
22 University of Minnesota Morris
university of minnesota morris alumni association
90s ECONOMICS AND 
MANAGEMENT ALUMNI 
REUNION
In August economics and management 
alumni from the 1990s gathered in the 
Twin Cities for a decade reunion.
2019 STATE FAIR
UMN Morris had a booth at 
the Minnesota State Fair in 
August. Alumni stopped by to 
say hello!
COMMUNITY OF SCHOLARS 
ADMISSIONS VOLUNTEER EVENTS
In December and February alumni came back to share their stories 
as admissions volunteers at the annual Community of Scholars 
competitive scholarship events. 
23Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
university of minnesota morris alumni association
ANNUAL MIDWINTER 
ALUMNI EVENT
In February alumni enjoyed the  
UMMAA’s annual meeting and midwinter 
get together, this year for bowling, 
conversation, and reminiscing at Elsie’s  
in Northeast Minneapolis. 
CONCERT CHOIR 40TH ANNIVERSARY ALUMNI 
REUNION AND PERFORMANCE
Choir alumni celebrated the program’s 40th anniversary with songs. Professor Emeritus 
Ken Hodgson founded the Concert Choir in 1978. 
CLASS OF 1969 50-YEAR 
REUNION AND 1960S 
DECADE REUNION
The Class of 1969 celebrated its 50-year 
reunion, in conjunction with the 1960s 
class reunion and Homecoming 2019.
SCIENCE AND MATH 
ALUMNI AND STUDENTS 
NETWORKING EVENT
Science and math alums got together with 
faculty and current students on campus 
during Homecoming weekend. 
HOMECOMING 2019
REUNIONS
24 University of Minnesota Morris
LOOK 
WHO’S 
BACK! Alumni like you come back to campus for all kinds of reasons. Whether returning as guest lecturers, performers, discussion leaders, or familiar friends, you’re always welcome here.
Jim Olson, Jim Togeas, Latterell Visiting Alumnus Dan Rutherford ’96, Drew Rutherford ’91, Rob Rutherford ’92, and Nancy Carpenter
Science and Math Visiting Alumna Nancy Atkinson ’82 with  
Gordon McIntosh
Peh Ng with Adam Yust ’09
25Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
Nathan Schmid ’16 and Cory Schroeder Schmid ’16
Nick Maciej ’09 Katrine Sjovold ’18
Brittney Ferrian ’17
Kellie Ziebarth ’15
26 University of Minnesota Morris
class notes
Class of ’72
Larry Krieg was inducted into the Minnesota Girls Basketball 
Coaches Association Hall of Fame in April 2019. Krieg coached 
the Elk River girls varsity team from 1997 to 2006. He finished 
his career with a record of 151-68 and was voted section coach  
of the year four times. While coaching, his teams won five  
section championships and have 2nd (2001) and 4th (1998) in  
the state tournament.
In Memoriam
Diane Moerke ’66
Ruby L. Mortenson ’66
Bruce Miller ’72
Scott J. Behan ’89
Marv Dyrstad ’60 writes: “We had the chance to share some 
memories of WCSA and UMM. We met Peter Torvik ’56 and Pat 
on a Danube River Cruise. What a surprise to find that we had 
common connections to the Morris area through our education 
paths. It was a pleasure to meet someone with great memories 
about the school(s) many years ago.”
Mark Kraft ’79 shared this photo of Beta Sigma Psi Alumni 
Association! Back row, left to right: Don Tangen ’69, Randy 
Nelson ’79, John Habedank ’81, Bob Hartman ’76, Steve 
Brandt ’77, Kraft, Lloyd Nelson ’80, Joe Chesley ’79, Rick 
Reed ’80, Harley Vestrum ’73. Middle row, left to right:  
Everett Lien ’73, Mike Schwarze ’72, Bill Neuenfeldt ’80, 
Gordy Elliott ’75, Mick Thorsland ’70, Dan Vikstrom ’81, 
Jim Koestler ’81. Front row, left to right: Eric Larson ’82, 
Tom Larson ’80, Nile Fellows ’75, Bob Hendrickson ’76. Not 
pictured: Dave Peterson ’74.
Alumni love coming to campus to give back! Alum Katie 
Jacobson ’14, pictured here with Taylor Hays ’13, Stephen 
Harper ’14, and Dillon McBrady ’13, came back for the 
annual Community of Scholars event. Find out how Katie 
and others make the Morris Network stronger:
What keeps you connected to UMN Morris?
This is a question that Stephen, Taylor, Dillon, and I had a 
lot of fun discussing in our carpool home from Community 
of Scholars. We all agreed that when we were in college, we 
chose to lean in and say yes to opportunities, experiences, 
and memories that would create strong friendships. Our 
group kept growing to create a larger community, and our 
common bond was that we all valued those relationships. 
After graduation, we continued to prioritize one another 
by celebrating milestones together: promotions, weddings, 
house warmings, baby showers, holidays, and “just because” 
reunions. Each event is filled with giggles, fun stories, and 
excited hugs. We can go weeks, months, or years without 
seeing one another, then pick up right where we left off. Not 
everyone gets to experience such fabulous friendships, so 
we all are really proud and really lucky to truly have a UMN 
Morris family for life.
Why do you choose to give back?
Leaning back into the community that gave us so much is 
an easy way to pay it forward (plus it’s a great excuse for 
another reunion!). We’re still able to give back: we chose to 
do so by donating our time. It’s a different yet fruitful way to 
contribute while staying connected; our Morris family been 
one of the most amazing gifts for us all in the years since 
calling the prairie home.
Pictured: Hays, Harper, McBrady, and Jacobson.
POWER OF POSSIBILITY
27Winter/Spring Profile
class notes
Class of ’77
Jon Fellows was inducted into the Minnesota Baseball Coaches 
Association Hall of Fame in October 2019. Fellows coached 
the Ortonville Trojans baseball team for 34 years, from 1985 
to 2018. In those 34 years, he earned six Pheasant Conference 
championships and two Section 6A second-place trophies. 
He also was selected Conference Coach of the Year five times 
and District Coach of the Year once. He finished his career at 
Ortonville with a record of 349-284.
Friends who began as freshmen in the fall of 1971 got together for lunch in August 2019. Left to right: Barb Wertish ’74, Nancy 
Cambronne ’76, Pam Stevens ’75, Maggie Keating ’75, Deb Cziok ’75, Barbara Klug ’75, and Merrie Miller ’75.
Class of ’83
DeAnne De Guse Malterer retired after 34 years of teaching, to 
devote more time to her elected role as county commissioner for 
Waseca County.
Class of ’84
Alan Zimmel writes: November 2019 marked 25 years I have been 
enjoying my work with the technical consulting firm of Booz Allen 
Hamilton. My wife, Jane, and I have three sons and live 35 miles 
northwest of San Antonio, Texas.
Carol Eckersen ’80 met with UMN Morris alumni over the summer and writes: “It was great to see these bright young UMN Morris 
grads and hear how well they are all doing.” The first picture is Nate Swanson ’08, Jessica and Ben Edwards ’06. The second picture 
is Bekah Biorn ’08 and Mike Biorn.
28 University of Minnesota Morris
class notes
Class of ’92
Dr. Geoffrey Bradshaw was promoted to Dean of International 
Education for Madison College. Bradshaw began his career 
at Madison College in 1997 after finishing a PhD in cultural 
anthropology from UW-Madison. He previously served as the 
director of the Center for International Education, known 
nationally and internationally as a model for community college 
internationalization.
Class of ’95
Lieutenant Colonel Cory Hanna, USAF, retired, former 
Mansfield Fellow, former staff officer at HQ, US Forces Japan, 
former Japan Director at United States Pacific Command, 
accepted an offer to serve as the Japan Director at the National 
Security Council.
Class of ’97
Karin Wolverton starred in a leading role in the Mill City 
Summer Opera’s Cosi fan Tutte last summer.
Class of ’98
Kari Jaeger was awarded 2018 Educator of the Year in January 
2019 by the Hastings Area Chamber of Commerce.
Class of ’99
Mark and Christy Daigle celebrated their 20th wedding 
anniversary. They have five children. Christy just finished her 
master’s in school counseling.
Class of ’06
Laura Hildreth joined the Institute for Defense Analyses  
(IDA) as a research staff member in IDA’s Cost Analysis and 
Research Division.
Class of ’09
Calla Bjorklund Jarvie graduated with a master of library 
science from Emporia State University in August 2019. She is 
the library director in Luverne.
Class of ’14
Katie Jacobson has completed all 9 coursework requirements 
and passed the national board exam to become a Certified 
Financial Planner™. She joins just ~1.2% of the 76,000 CFP® 
certificants in the nation who are female and under the age of 
30. Katie works with many alumni on their personal financial 
plans. Calling Minneapolis home, she and her team work 
predominantly in the medical field with MDs and PharmDs, 
but also with the movers and shakers of our communities, in 
Minnesota and around the nation.
Class of ’15
Britta Buchanan started her master of elementary education 
at The George Washington University in Washington, DC. She 
is on track to graduate in 2021 and plans to work as a general 
education teacher in DC schools after she earns her degree and 
teaching certifications.
Class of ’16
Sarah Cronk was sworn in as a law enforcement officer for 
Rochester Police Department in June 2019. Her nephews, who 
also want to work in law enforcement in the future, pinned her 
badge onto her uniform in hopes of creating a new tradition in 
her family. 
Annie Erickson completed her first full marathon in June 
2019, following a series of half marathons and other shorter 
races. She hopes to run another marathon in the near future.
Golf Coach Jana Koehler ’00 with Brittany Lormis ’21, 
Rochert, at the 2019 Morris Invite at Minnewaska Golf Club 
on September 20, 2019.
Members of the Classes of ’05 and ’06 celebrated their annual 
reunion in the Black Hills of South Dakota. Back, left to right: 
Lindsey Renner Hildebrand ’06, Allison Jordahl ’05, Jericha 
Feller Phelps ’05, Laura Sullivan Moody ’05, Amanda  
Warner ’05, Allison Braun Hazuka ’06. Front, left to right: 
Heather Gardner Rezab ’06, Katana Jackson ’05
29Winter/Spring Profile
class notes
Send us your Class Notes.  
Please include high resolution photos!
Office of Alumni Relations, Welcome Center 
600 E 4th St, Morris, MN 56267
alumni@morris.umn.edu or 
alumni.morris.umn.edu/submit-class-note
Next Class Notes Deadline: June 1, 2020
Fondly Remembered...
Dwight H. Purdy, longtime English professor,  
passed away on October 15, 2019.
Jeanne Purdy, who taught at UMN Morris and was  
an important part of the community, passed away in  
March 2016.
Dennis Templeman, associate professor and founder of 
the anthropology major, passed away on January 8. 
Class of ’17 
Jamaal Cummings was hired as a loyalty giving officer for the 
South Dakota State University Foundation in April 2019. He 
earned a master’s in sport administration from Arkansas State 
University in 2018. 
Lane Quick was hired by Telsmith Inc. as a regional part  
sales representative for the southeast region covering  
Tennessee, North Carolina, South Carolina, Florida, Alabama 
and Mississippi.
RECENT PUBLICATIONS
BY UMN MORRIS AUTHORS AND EDITORS
HAVE YOU PUBLISHED A BOOK 
RECENTLY? LET US KNOW!  
alumni@morris.umn.edu
Class of ’19
Megan Hanson was hired by Crookston Public Schools as a 
kindergarten teacher at Washington Elementary School for the 
2019–20 school year.
Paige Quinlivan’s play Moon River was performed at the 2019 
Minneapolis Fringe Festival. It was directed by Maggie Caplan ’19 
and had original music by Claire McManus ’19. Featured in the 
cast in leading roles were Katie Rowles-Perich ’18 and Bailey 
Soika ’19.
Correction: we incorrectly listed the title of Dennis M.  
Clausen’s ’65 novel, The Sins of Rachel Sims, in our last issue.  
We apologize for the error.  
Jennifer Deane
professor of history
Herbert Grundmann (1902–1970): Essays  
on Heresy Literacy and Inquisition 
(York Medieval Press, 2019)
Julie Eckerle
professor of English
Women’s Life Writing and  
Early Modern Ireland
(University of Nebraska Press, 2019)
Kiel Harell ’04
assistant professor of education
with Scott D. Wurdinger, J. Cynthia 
McDermott, and Hilton Smith
Empowering our Students for the  
Future: Encouraging Self-Direction  
and Life-Long Learning
(Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2019)
Michael Lackey
Distinguished McKnight University 
Professor of English
Conversations with Biographical 
Novelists: Truthful Fictions across  
the Globe
(Bloomsbury, 2019)
Don Lifto ’71
with Barbara Nicol
School Tax Elections: Planning for 
Success in the New Normal, 3rd Edition
(Roman and Littlefield, 2019)
30 University of Minnesota Morris
cougar news
JOHNSON ’03 NAMED UMN MORRIS 
INTERCOLLEGIATE ATHLETICS DIRECTOR
The University of Minnesota Morris has announced Matthew 
Johnson ’03 as the new director of intercollegiate athletics. Johnson 
has been serving as interim director since August 2018 after holding 
coaching, assistant AD, and associate AD roles at UMN Morris.
Tracey Anderson, associate professor of biology and faculty 
athletic representative, chaired the national search. Anderson said, 
“The committee was impressed with the extremely high level of 
support for Matt we saw in this search process. His collaborative 
leadership style, commitment to the academic and athletic success 
of student athletes, and record of accomplishment in advancing 
our student athletes’ experiences are very highly regarded on our 
campus and in our community. I’m excited for our future in 
Cougar Athletics.”
“I am incredibly humbled and honored to be named director 
of intercollegiate athletics at the University of Minnesota Morris,” 
Johnson said. “Serving in an interim role for the past year allowed 
me to fully immerse myself in the position, and I could not be more 
excited for all that is ahead for Cougar Athletics. I want to thank  
all the people and groups that were involved with this opportunity;  
including the search committee, the administration on campus, as 
well as the Cougar coaches and student-athletes.”
Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs Sandra Olson-Loy praised 
Johnson’s demonstrated ability to bring new ideas to fruition 
through creative partnerships. In his time as the interim director of 
athletics, Johnson secured Cougar Athletic’s first exclusive gear and 
apparel deal, launched the rebranding of the Cougar Sports Center, 
increased participation and funding from the Cougar Alumni 
Golf Classic, and rebranded the Cougar Athletic Association to 
the Cougar Club. Under his leadership during the 2018-19 school 
year, 84 student-athletes were named academic all-conference—
recording GPAs of 3.5 or higher, 61 student-athletes were named 
all-conference, and two Cougar teams won conference titles. 
Johnson has been active in the Upper Midwest Athletic 
Conference, NCAA national conventions, and the National 
Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics. Prior to being 
named interim director of athletics, Johnson served as an assistant 
and associate athletic director for seven years under athletic 
directors Mark Fohl and Jason Herbers, whom he credits as 
mentors. He has been the Sports Studies and Athletics academic 
discipline coordinator since 2012. Johnson held a variety of 
coaching roles with the Cougar football program for 15 seasons, 
including serving as offensive coordinator and co-head coach.
As a Cougar student-athlete, Johnson was a four-year starter 
(2000—03) and two-year captain (2002—03) for the football 
program, starting all 44 games he played on the offensive line. He 
was recognized in 2004 as the UMN Morris men’s honor athlete.
Johnson earned his bachelor’s degree in social science with  
a minor in history and coaching certification from the  
University of Minnesota Morris. He holds a master’s in  
education from the University of Minnesota Duluth with a focus  
on educational administration.
He and his wife Abbey Starzecki Johnson ’05, a former  
Cougar soccer student-athlete, have two children, Cooper (9)  
and Crosby (6). 
Johnson’s love of sports is evident beyond the campus. He 
assigns and coordinates Morris area high school basketball officials, 
has refereed multiple Minnesota State High School League state 
basketball tournaments, and recently refereed his first high school 
basketball game at the Target Center.
Johnson also was elected to the Morris Area School Board in 
2018. The UMN Morris AD collaborates with Morris Community 
Education to provide oversight for the Regional Fitness Center—a 
campus and community partnership.
The Cougar Club provides opportunities for nearly  
     400 Cougar athletes and 19 athletic teams.
WON’T YOU JOIN US: COUGAR CLUB
To learn more and join, visit z.umn.edu/CougarClub
31Winter/Spring 2020 Profile
cougar news
MEN’S CROSS COUNTRY
The men’s cross country team ran to a third-place finish at the 
2019 UMAC Championships. Ryan Anderson ’20, Bellevue, 
Idaho, finished fourth, and Joel Knopp ’23, Saint Cloud, took 
14th to pace the Cougars. The Cougars then were honored with 
four plaudits from the UMAC: Anderson was tabbed First Team 
All-Conference; Knopp and Raymond Abraham ’20, Cambridge, 
garnered Second Team All-Conference honors; and Edmund 
Cease ’20, Grand Rapids, earned the Sportsmanship Award.
WOMEN’S CROSS COUNTRY
The women’s cross country team finished second at the UMAC 
Championships. McKenna Langerud ’23, East Grand Forks, ran 
to the individual title, the second Cougar to finish first overall in 
as many years. Along with Langerud, Kaitlyn Ladwig ’21, Granite 
Falls, took fourth; Alexa Yeager ’21, Clearwater, placed seventh; 
and Paige Stearns ’21, Woodbury, finished eighth. The UMAC 
honored Tony Krueger as the UMAC Women’s Cross Country 
Coach of the Year; Langerud, Ladwig, Yeager, and Paige  
Stearns were tabbed First Team All-Conference; and Montana 
Lawrence ’21, Princeton, earned the Sportsmanship Award.
FOOTBALL
The Cougar football program finished the season with a 
1-9 record (1-9 in UMAC play). The UMAC announced its 
postseason honors, and Adam Farag ’20, Windom, and Marcos 
Luna ’20, Minneapolis, were named All-UMAC First Team 
Defense; Drew Shipley ’20, Coeur D’Alene, Idaho, was tabbed 
All-UMAC First Team Special Teams; Branden Carlson ’22, 
Mayer, was named All-UMAC Second Team Offense; Matt  
Menth ’22, Mayer, was tabbed All-UMAC Second Team Defense; 
and Caleb Kemp ’20, Wabasso, earned the UMAC Sportsmanship 
Award. Shipley also was named the UMAC Most Valuable Special 
Teams Player.
VOLLEYBALL 
For the seventh-straight season, the Cougar volleyball team 
advanced to the UMAC Tournament Final. The Cougars finished 
the year with an overall record of 16-12 and went 7-1 in the 
UMAC regular season for their second UMAC regular season 
title. Six Cougars were honored with postseason honors from the 
UMAC: Layne Herrmann ’20, Browntown; Morgan Miller ’20, 
Twin Valley; and Brenna Tinjum ’22, Underwood, were named 
All-UMAC First Team; Tori Everson ’21, Willmar, garnered 
All-UMAC Second Team honors; Alyssa Ukestad ’22, Jamestown, 
North Dakota, was tabbed All-UMAC Honorable Mention; and 
Mia Frick ’21, Wayzata, earned the UMAC Sportsmanship Award.
McKenna Langerud
Ryan Anderson
Drew Shipley
WON’T YOU JOIN US: COUGAR CLUB
32 University of Minnesota Morris
cougar news
MEN’S GOLF
The men’s golf team tallied a ninth-place finish at the 2019 
UMAC Championships. Trent Jerome ’21, Lancaster, paced 
the Cougars with a 30th-place finish. Following the UMAC 
Championships, Kyle Hastings ’20, Circle Pines, was tabbed with 
the UMAC Sportsmanship Award on behalf of the Cougars.
WOMEN’S GOLF
The women’s golf program recorded a third-place finish at the 
2019 UMAC Championships. At the meet, Payton Sierra ’22, 
Porcupine, South Dakota, led the way with a 10th-place finish, 
while Shelby Maloney ’23, Kasson, took 13th. Following the 
UMAC Championships, Sierra was named to the All-UMAC 
First Team, and Kaya Quinn ’22, Ramsey, earned All-UMAC 
Honorable Mention honors. Tori Grates ’23, Litchfield, received 
the UMAC Sportsmanship Award.
MEN’S SOCCER
The men’s soccer team concluded the season with a 5–14 record. 
Five Cougars were honored by the UMAC: Gabe Arreguin ’20, 
Waseca, and Devon Thompson ’21, Moorhead, were named to 
the All-UMAC Second Team, Aaron Wackerfuss ’22, Chaska, 
and Carter Watkinson ’23, Farmington, were tabbed All-UMAC 
Honorable Mention, and Alexi Harmon ’20, Winona, received 
the UMAC Sportsmanship Award on behalf of UMN Morris.
WOMEN’S SOCCER
The women’s soccer program finished the season with a 6–9 
record, with a conference record of 4–4. Five members of the 
women’s soccer team were honored from the UMAC, and  
Sam Tate ’21, Covington, was named All-UMAC First Team, 
Monica Calderon ’23, Indio, California, was tabbed All-UMAC 
Second Team; Brooke Lorentz ’20, Sauk Rapids; and Harper 
Toward ’23, Bemidji, were named All-UMAC Honorable 
Mention, while Michelle Wolney ’20, Columbia Heights, earned 
the UMAC Sportsmanship Award.
Trent Jerome
Sam Tate
Gabe Arreguin
Payton Sierra
A model for 
living and learning
The campaign for the University of Minnesota Morris
CAMPAIGN PROGRESS REPORT
Won’t you join us?
give.morris.umn.edu/model-living-and-learning
LIFE-CHANGING STUDENT EXPERIENCES
TALENTED FACULTY LEADERS
HISTORIC FACILITIES
FUTURE OF THE REGION
YEARS LEFT  
IN CAMPAIGN
399
2 1
1
additional students will 
receive scholarships
endowed
professorships
new Edward J. and Helen Jane 
Morrison Performing Arts Center
renovated Edson Auditorium
new faculty 
enhancement fund
FUNDING UNDERWAY:
community softball facility
Nokoomis Niibi 
Equay sculpture
FUNDING UNDERWAY:
EcoCenter facility
Welcome Center
600 East Fourth Street
Mo