DIGITALIZATION OF CREATIVE MARKETS: EFFORTS TO DEVELOP FAMILY ECONOMIC RESILIENCE IN LAMPUNG

161
MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173
E-ISSN 2656-9477
DIGITALIZATION OF CREATIVE MARKETS: EFFORTS TO DEVELOP 
FAMILY ECONOMIC RESILIENCE IN LAMPUNG
Siti Zulaikha1, Enny Puji Lestari2, Titut Sudiono3, Maulana Husen S4
1,2,3,4IAIN Metro Lampung
Jl. Ki Hajar Dewantara No.15A, Kota Metro, Lampung
Email: 1sitizulaikha@metrouniv.ac.id, 2ennypujilestari@metrouniv.ac.id, 
3sudiono24@gmail.com, 4maulanahs070@gmail.com
Abstract: This study aims to analyze the digitalization of the creative market on the economic growth of 
the family and to see the role of the family in the economic resilience of the community. This research 
uses a qualitative method with a case study approach that is field research. Sources of data from creative 
markets in two districts, namely Metro City and East Lampung. The results of the study indicate that 
the creative market is able to encourage family economic growth towards a more established direction, 
and build family relationships in economic resilience. The digitalization of the creative market has also 
been proven to be able to improve the family’s economy, such as meeting secondary and tertiary needs, 
education savings and retirement savings, fulfilling education costs, and fulfilling kitchen utensils. Another 
indication of the progress of the family economy is also marked by the development of fundamental aspects 
that support the creative economy, such as creativity, innovation, and invention. These three aspects can 
then affect creative business opportunities that are more wide open, more diverse livelihoods, easier to 
find additional income, souvenirs typical of tourist areas, and the title of a tourist city.
Keywords: Digitalization; Creative Market; Economic Resilience
Abstrak: Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis digitalisasi pasar kreatif terhadap pertumbuhan 
ekonomi keluarga dan melihat peran serta keluarga dalam ketahanan ekonomi masyarakat. Riset ini 
menggunakan metode kualitatif dengan pendekatan studi kasus yang bersifat penelitian lapangan. Sumber 
data dari pasar kreatif yang ada di dua kabupaten yaitu Kota Metro dan Lampung Timur. Hasil penelitian 
menunjukkan bahwa pasar kreatif mampu mendorong pertumbuhan ekonomi keluarga ke arah yang lebih 
mapan, dan terbangun relasi keluarga dalam ketahanan ekonomi. Digitalisasi pasar kreatif juga terbukti 
mampu meningkatkan ekonomi keluarga seperti pemenuhan kebutuhan sekunder dan tersier, tabungan 
pendidikan dan tabungan hari tua, pemenuhan biaya pendidikan, dan pemenuhan peralatan dapur. Indikasi 
lain kemajuan ekonomi keluarga juga ditandai dengan berkembangnya aspek-aspek fundamental yang 
mendukung ekonomi kreatif, seperti kreativitas, inovasi, dan penemuan. Ketiga aspek tersebut selanjutnya 
dapat mempengaruhi peluang bisnis kreatif yang lebih terbuka lebar, mata pencaharian yang lebih beragam, 
lebih mudah untuk mencari penghasilan tambahan, oleh-oleh khas daerah wisata, dan gelar kota wisata.
Kata kunci: Digitalisasi; Pasar Kreatif; Ketahanan Ekonomi
Siti Zulaikha, Enny Puji Lestari , Titut Sudiono, Maulana Husen S
162 | MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173; E-ISSN 2656-9477
Introduction
A market is a place for buyers and sellers 
where the market share carries out trade 
transactions according to their needs. It is 
different from the creative market;creative 
economic actors develop creative assets by 
prioritizing ideas and knowledge from human 
and natural resources as the most critical 
production factors.
Creative economy actors in driving the 
economy through an intelligent, innovative, 
and creative design dramatically affect the 
welfare of the community, especially micro, 
small and medium enterprises. Creative 
economy opportunities maximize the potential 
and opportunities for economic growth 
and development; in line with his opinion 
Purnomo in his book Creative Economic by 
AnggriPuspita Sari et al, said that the creative 
economy is the use of creativity the creation of 
innovation through technology development.1
ArifYahya first offered the digital concept; he 
said that digital destinations are promotional 
media.2 Where in the management of the 
creative market, there is interference with 
digital concepts as a medium to promote 
the creative market. In line with Sunanik's 
opinion quoted by Ikhwanus Sofa, the creative 
economy is believed to answer the challenges 
of short and medium-term problems.3
Therefore, looking at the current 
development of the digitalization market, 
economic actors come from small and medium 
businesses, this is very helpful for the existence 
of a creative need that involves the local 
1 Anggri Puspita Sari et al., Ekonomi Kreatif (Yayasan 
Kita Menulis, 2020), p. 4.
2 Slamet Mulyana, Meria Octavianti, and Nadila Zahara 
Faradysa, “Pengelolaan Media Sosial Sebagai Media Promosi 
Pasar Digital Cikundul Sukabumi,” No. 1 (2019), p. 50.
3 Ikhwanus Shofa, “Pertumbuhan Dan Strategi 
Pengembangan Ekonomi Kreatif Kota Malang,” Jurnal 
Pangrita 1, No. 1 (2018), p. 76.
community in helping the financial resilience 
of the community who have contributed to 
the economy so that it has a significant impact 
on the creation of a positive, innovative, 
and creative business climate which are the 
competitive advantages of a nation.4
Lampung is one of the drivers of the 
creative economy, based on statistical data that 
the number of creative economy businesses 
is 178,511, spread from various regions in 
Lampung, namely by City/Regency, 1.67% 
West Lampung, 6.23% South Lampung, 5.58% 
Central Lampung, 5.06% East Lampung, 
4.81% Metro City, Bandar Lampung City 
58.05%, 4.16% Pesawaran, 2.47% Tanggamus, 
5.84% Pringsewu.5
Data from creative business actors in 
Lampung shows that public interest in 
coming up with innovative ideas has become 
an excellent magnet for creative market players 
to develop regional potential and human 
resources, thereby contributing to economic 
resilience, especially families.
The author focuses more on the creative 
economy in the Culinary, Craft, fashion, and 
music sectors in this study. From the distribution 
of innovative economy sub-sector data, it shows 
14.68% culinary, 2.60% craft, 4.42% fashion 
and 7.01% music.6 The intensity of the creative 
industry is a breakthrough in increasing the 
imagination of human resources, so it is necessary 
to study its growth and development, which is 
caused by the existence of family relations in 
maintaining economic resilience that depends 
on the value of digitalization carried out.7
4 DR Mari Elka Pangestu, “Hasil Konvensi Pengembangan 
Ekonomi Kreatif 2009-2015,” June 2008, p. 27.
5 Badan Ekonomi Kreatif, Infografis Sebaran Pelaku 
Ekonomi Kreatif (Jakarta, 2019), p. 25.
6 Badan Ekonomi Kreatif, Infografis Sebaran Pelaku 
Ekonomi Kreatif (Jakarta, 2019), p. 25
7 Ansori, Aan. “Digitalisasi Ekonomi Syariah.” 
Islamiconomic: Jurnal Ekonomi Keuangan Dan Bisnis Islam 
7, No. 1 (2016), p. 54
Digitalization of Creative Markets
MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan | 163
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173; E-ISSN 2656-9477
Metro and East Lampung are one of the 
focuses of the author's research where the 
existence of a creative market by looking at 
data is 5.06% of East Lampung, 4.81% of 
Metro City with the creative economy sub-
sector, the highest percentage of which in 
Lampung is culinary 14.68%.8 Therefore, 
the development of the creative economy 
of the digital market needs to be studied 
whether digitalization of the creative market 
can encourage family economic growth. It is 
also necessary to examine how family relations 
are involved in the financial resilience of the 
community.
The purpose of this study is to analyze the 
digitalization of the creative market on the 
economic growth of the family and to see the 
role of the family in the financial resilience of 
the community.
Methodology
Based on the research location, this 
research will focus on creative market traders 
in the Metro City and East Lampung. 
Therefore, this research is included in field 
research. A biblioticanalysis is only used to 
define digitization and economic resilience 
in the creative market. Meanwhile, the data 
that is processed and presented is descriptive 
narrative research. Therefore, this research is 
included in the type of qualitative research. 
There is no numerical data that is the subject 
of the study here.
Primary data sources were obtained from 
three creative market traders, two operators, 
buyers with a random system, and one tourism 
office. The focus of the study is divided into 
one city and one district. The chosen ones 
are Metro City and East Lampung Regency.
8 Badan Ekonomi Kreatif, Infografis Sebaran Pelaku 
Ekonomi Kreatif (Jakarta, 2019), p. 25 
Buyers or consumers are selected by random 
sampling with the following considerations: (i) 
residence; (ii) formal educational background 
of traders; (iii) culinary traders.
Secondary sources are all data in magazines, 
newspapers, journals, and books that have 
discussed the creative market that uses 
digitalization to develop economic resilience.
Data collection techniques used are 
observation, interviews, and documentation. 
Statements are employed to observe the behavior 
of creative market traders. Interviews are used 
to explore data more deeply. Meanwhile, 
focused group discussion is used to finalize and 
strengthen research findings.
This research is descriptive-analytical; the 
writer goes through two stages. In the first stage, 
the writer reviews several pieces of literature 
and then determines the research setting. 
While the second stage, the writer conducts 
field research in the form of a comprehensive 
assessment, both by conducting observations 
and interviews with informants, on the subject 
of the study. And analyzing the field findings 
and writing the ethnographic strategy for 
developing economic resilience for creative 
market traders.
The author gets some creative market 
references in East Lampung Regency and 
Metro City at the literature review stage. 
The authors get directly from interviews 
withseveral informants.
Discussion
A. Digitalization of Creative Markets Can 
Encourage Family Economic Growth
The existence of the creative market by 
looking at 5.06% of East Lampung and 4.81% 
of Metro City with the highest percentage in 
Lampung, namely the culinary sub-sector 
is at 14.68%. Creative market packaging 
through digital media is very effective in the 
Siti Zulaikha, Enny Puji Lestari , Titut Sudiono, Maulana Husen S
164 | MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173; E-ISSN 2656-9477
current digital era, where Population growth 
has coincided with unparalleled technological 
developments.
a. Digital Media Scopes
The digitalization of creative markets in East 
Lampung and Metro City increases with the 
web or social networks Facebook, WhatsApp, 
and Instagram, which can bring together 
sellers and buyers at the targeted marketplace. 
The digital media used by the creative market 
where the research is conducted the Payungi, 
Paruk Mas, Pak Tejo, and the WarungMacan 
creative market. From Facebook data, the 
number of followers is as follows;
Courtesy: Facebook
The data above shows that the most 
social media followers on Facebook are 
Payungimarketwith 1,501 followers, followed 
by Paruk Mas Market with 294 people, and 
Pak Tejo Creative Market with 122 people. 
The WarungMacan market does not have a 
Facebook account like other creative markets.
In addition to Facebook, there is Instagram 
which is used as one of the digital media in 
promoting the creative market, which is as 
follows;
Courtesy: Instagram
From this data, it can be seen that the 
followers of the creative market on Instagram 
accounts are mostly Pak Tejo creative market 
with a total of 2,436 people, then there is the 
Payungimarket with 1,950 followers, 240 people 
of Paruk Masmarket, and 126 PawangMacan 
market. The number of followers on Instagram 
does not affect the number of visitors. However, 
the distribution of products in viral marketing 
among consumers is to become a magnet for 
visitors by spreading posts sent by the team of 
creators in the digitalization category, which 
can be felt by visitors so that they have an 
efficient and practical impact, open networking, 
conduct economic transactions and can provide 
magnetic power. Visitors come to the creative 
market to buy culinary food according to their 
wishes. As illustrated in the data above, the 
Payungimarketposts are 7,562, most of the four 
existing creative markets.
The use of digital marketing benefits the 
home industry. It is also implemented to 
increasebrand awareness9, considered effective 
and efficient in facilitating product promotion 
and introduction to the broader community 
so that product branding can be built.
In addition, the collaboration of high 
concept and high touch has made innovation 
an artistic and emotional beauty in creation, 
creating opportunities that can help people 
support the economy with human interaction 
that gives meaning to the visitors who come 
to the creative market and for traders.10
9 Siti Alvi Sholikhatin, Wanda Fitrianingsih, and Sahira 
Dhiyaulhaq, “Pelatihan Digital Marketing Bagi Anggota 
Nasyiatul Aisyiyah Purbalingga Dalam Menghadapi Era Pasar 
Global Dan Pengembangan Industri Kreatif” 4 (n.d.), p.850.
10 Azizah, Siti Nur, and Muhfiatun. “Pengembangan 
Ekonomi Kreatif Berbasis Kearifan Lokal Pandanus 
Handicraft dalam Menghadapi Pasar Modern Perspektif 
Ekonomi Syariah (Study Case di Pandanus Nusa 
Sambisari Yogyakarta).” Aplikasia: Jurnal Aplikasi Ilmu-
ilmu Agama 17, No. 2 (February 12, 2018), p. 63. https://
doi.org/10.14421/aplikasia.v17i2.1273.
Digitalization of Creative Markets
MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan | 165
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173; E-ISSN 2656-9477
The role of the creative economy, which has 
its characteristics, especially in each market, has 
become a culture in economic development 
in society. This has implications for aspects 
that are the basis for supporting the creative 
economy, namely:
1) Creativity
 As something unique, fresh, and acceptable 
to the general public. Because creativity is 
something that arises from something that 
already exists into something that has never 
existed. This can be seen from the creative 
markets in Metro City, namely Payungi, 
Pak Tejo, and Paruk Mas, as well as the 
creative markets in East Lampung, namely 
WarungMacan or PawangMacan.
 The market location has been transformed 
into a place for photo and culinary spots, 
crafts, music, and narrow streets that have 
been transformed into tourist destinations 
that can be visited in creative markets in 
Metro City and East Lampung.
 The creativity carried out by the creative 
market is by creating Instagram and 
Facebook accounts created by thePayungi 
market creator team in creating content, the 
themes and contents that must be poured 
must be different, a strategy is needed in 
uploading content in each event, namely 
traditional culinary, photo spots and places 
that can be visited in the Panyungi market, 
then the accounts are uploaded every day 
in the morning and evening.11
 The creativity carried out by ParukMas market 
is by uploading creative activity flyers that are 
photo documentation of photo spots there 
and traditional food menus.12 Meanwhile, 
11 M. Imam Khoiri, Interview About Digitalization 
of Creative Markets in Encouraging Family Economic 
Growth, September11, 2021
12 Hidayat, Interview About Digitalization of Creative 
Markets in Encouraging Family Economic Growth, 
September11, 2021
in Pak Tejo market, creativity can be seen 
in the craftsmen and street musicians who 
decorate each event.13 In addition, there is a 
PawangMacanmarket that has the invention 
to hold children's coloring competitions and 
create accounts on social media with culinary 
food menus.14
 It can be seen that there is creativity that 
depicts art and culture from a natural resource 
that is transformed into a place where traders 
and buyers feel comfortable visiting; this 
becomes a magnet for market share to enjoy 
the beautiful panorama of nature with a 
village atmosphere that is dense with culinary 
specialties from Indonesia that market.
2) Innovation
 A transformation from an idea based on 
creativity to a product that provides added 
value and benefits for the surrounding 
community who feel and impact economic 
growth and new jobs. Payungi, Pak Tejo, 
Paruk Mas, and PawangMacan markets are 
innovations in producing products. The 
benefits can be handled directly at every trade 
event, or those who don't hold merchandise. 
This has a significant impact on encouraging 
the family's economic growth.
Location: Payungimarket
13 Linang Kharisma, Interview with the Creative Team 
about Digitizing Creative Markets in Encouraging Family 
Economic Growth, September 2021.
14 Atik Nurakhimah, Interview with the Creative 
Team about Digitizing Creative Markets in Encouraging 
Family Economic Growth, September 2021.
Siti Zulaikha, Enny Puji Lestari , Titut Sudiono, Maulana Husen S
166 | MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173; E-ISSN 2656-9477
 The picture shows that every traditional 
food event in the Payungimarket is in great 
demand by visitors; this is very inspiring 
for many young people, communities, and 
activists. In building communication with 
the district, a collaboration by improving 
creativity can increase capabilities.15 No less 
attractive, other markets are also following 
in the footsteps of the Panyungi market.
3) Contrivance
 The emphasis in this aspect is to create 
something that has never existed with a 
unique characteristic that can be useful 
for the general public. The discovery of 
the existence of a creative market has 
become a particular color for the local 
village community, which has implications 
for the sub-district and can attract guests 
from other areas to visit because there is a 
creative market that is directly adjacent to 
the community and very responsive to the 
environment, with different characteristics.
Location: Pak Tejo Creative Market & Payungi 
Creative Market
 The picture above is located in Pak 
Tejocreative market and Panyungi market, 
showing existing roads that can be used for 
trading; this provides innovation in a place 
that can be managed into a creative need. 
It is different from the Paruk Mas market, 
which uses the land of the gardens to be 
15 Dwi Nugroho, Interview About Digitalization 
of Creative Markets in Encouraging Family Economic 
Growth, September 2021.
transformed into a culinary place and a 
photo hotspot. The land used for the mat is 
rented out to traders. So there are benefits 
that garden owners and traders feel.
Location: Paruk Mas Market
 
 A creative market is a unique invention with 
the use of natural resources and supported 
by human resources so that there is an 
innovative market that drives the millennial 
generation by using digitalization, which 
has transformed the usual place into a place 
that many people visit.
b. Creative Market Management Strategy
Managing the digitalization of creative 
markets prioritizes management aspects with 
managerial so that they can survive and 
compete in the market world. The management 
of digital needs carried out by Payungi Market, 
Paruk Mas Market, Pak Tejo Market, and 
WarungMacan Market in its direction is in line 
with SlametMulyana's opinion and was written 
in a journal entitled "Social Media Management 
as Promotional Media for Cikundul Sukabumi 
Digital Market,"16 creative market management 
by making several efforts, namely carrying out 
pre-events before the inauguration of the digital 
creative market, which is filled with activities in 
the form of competitions, and many more—
in addition, creating an official creative market 
16 Slamet Mulyana, Meria Octavianti, and Nadila Zahara 
Faradysa, “Pengelolaan Media Sosial Sebagai Media Promosi 
Pasar Digital Cikundul Sukabumi,” No. 1 (2019), p.18.
Digitalization of Creative Markets
MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan | 167
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173; E-ISSN 2656-9477
account and designing social media content 
related to routine activities every week in the 
digital creative market.
c. Creative Market Digitization Development 
Strategy
Creative market development prioritizes 
the use of internet technology. Technological 
development can increase productivity so 
that people's economic activities cannot be 
separated from the development of digital 
systems.17 This activity was carried out by the 
creative market activists of Payungi market, 
Paruk Mas Market, Pak Tejo Market, and 
WarungMacan Market. The existence of 
internet technology lowers transaction costs, 
so the products offered will be more ogled by 
the public with packaged content that makes 
people interested in buying them and visiting 
the destination.
The development carried out is by increasing 
creative and innovative human resources, 
growing products characterized by local wisdom 
that have global competitiveness, developing 
and strengthening environmentally friendly 
technologies, developing the availability of 
local materials, optimizing the use of an 
innovative product, and opening up access 
and maintaining networked connections.
d. Creative Market Digitization Marketing 
Strategy
Marketing is a form of planning in 
maximizing the creative market by digitizing. In 
this study, the authors found that Payungimarket 
has an Instagram account @pasarkreatif_
tejoagung, @kampungbudaya_tebas, @pakare_, 
17 Ni Ketut Sari Adnyani and Dewa Ayu Eka 
Agustini, “Digitalisasi Sebagai Pemulihan Perekonomian 
di Sektor Kerja Dalam mendukung Kebangkitan UMKM 
di Provinsi Bali,” Jurnal Pengabdian Masyarakat Media 
Ganesha Fhis 1, No. 2 (2020), p. 93.
riverswidecamp_, and @kampungkopipayungi. 
In contrast, Pak Tejo market has an Instagram 
account @paktejo. Besides that, Paruk Mas 
market has an Instagram account @parukmas, 
and WarungMacanmarket has an Instagram 
account @pawangmacan, optimizing Facebook 
and advertisement on another website, 
collaborating with the online community, and 
using respective creative markets.
Therefore, the digitalization marketing 
strategy has offered products supported by the 
creative potential of using digital media so that 
the target of marketing an innovative product can 
be socialized to the public as desired consumers.
B. Family Relations in Community Economic 
Resilience
Creating economic resilience on a macro 
scale starts from a smaller scope, namely at 
the family level. Solid relationships strengthen 
socializing activities in the community to 
build family economic resilience.18
Economic resilience relates to the ability 
of the community to use available resources 
to meet basic needs through strategies with 
social media. Therefore, digitalization plays a 
strategic role in fulfilling economic security, 
especially for families. The data on creative 
market culinary traders in Metro City and 
East Lampung are as follows;
Creative Market Culinary Traders
18 Rofaida, Rofi, Suryana, Asti Nur Aryanti, and Yoga 
Perdana. “Strategi Inovasi pada Industri Kreatif Digital: 
Upaya Memperoleh Keunggulan Bersaing pada Era 
Revolusi Industri 4.0.” Jurnal Manajemen dan Keuangan 
8, no. 3 (June 11, 2020), p. 42–44.
Siti Zulaikha, Enny Puji Lestari , Titut Sudiono, Maulana Husen S
168 | MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173; E-ISSN 2656-9477
From the culinary traders' data above, it is 
clear that the Payungimarket has more culinary 
market traders; namely, there are 45 traditional 
food traders, compared to the PawangMacan 
market, which only has 15 culinary traders. 
The cooperative relations carried out by the 
community and families can be seen from the 
number of creative market traders who can 
survive in the concept of the community's 
economic resilience movement. Therefore, it 
is necessary to look at the approach taken.
The approach is carried out by taking 
into account the movement's roadmap, thus 
characterizing the four indicators of economic 
resilience. The indicators of community 
economic resilience in the family are as follows;
a. Economic Stability
Unlimited support from family and closest 
people has a positive impact on the psyche of a 
person or group of people. Unlimited support 
has various forms, both verbal and deed. 
As a role model for the creative market in 
Lampung province, Payungi has had a higher 
level of empowerment than other innovative 
markets. The creative atmosphere that looks 
more lively from the administrators, traders, 
communities, communities, and government 
and educational institutions, both during 
market events and weekdays, makes the 
circulation of money evenly distributed in 
the area around Payungi. Likewise with Pak 
Tejo, through the savings approach, which 
was initially used to minimize the practice 
of usury in TejoAgung and the procedure 
by strengthening mindset as marketers, have 
made economic resilience and stability in 
these two creative markets stronger.
Strong indications of economic stability in 
these two markets are evidenced by the fact that 
each trader has a certain amount of money in 
a savings account managed by a third party, 
carries out education or lectures comfortably, 
and the continuity of family life is more secure 
with new livelihoods, thereby opening up a new 
door of income at the micro household level.
b. Market Efficiency
The progress of market efficiency refers to 
product marketing activities and the reach 
of the target market achieved. Paying, with 
stakeholders who have diverse backgrounds 
and are supported by collaboration with the 
community, makes visits to Payungi's social 
media accounts more complex. Payungi 
managed to take advantage of this complex 
public by segmenting it into specific sub-
groups by creatingnotable social media 
accounts, such as Payungi Wedding, which 
serves decorations, Payungi Book Store, 
Payungi Ethnic, Payungi Car, and many 
more. That way, the built culture tries to 
absorb as many visitors as possible through 
this segment. Likewise, with Paruk Mas, the 
concept of market efficiency allows market 
members to market their merchandise under 
the name Paruk Mas so that their marketing 
reach is more comprehensive when compared 
to one marketer's account.
c. Good Management
An indicator of good management is the 
growing awareness of stakeholders about 
their roles and functions in the organization. 
Contributions made by stakeholders are 
a form of complete understanding of the 
responsibility and feeling of belonging to the 
organization.19 In general, good management 
is built by strengthening internal and external 
relationships; for example, Payungi, on a narrow 
scale, integrates stakeholders, while on a broader 
19 Firdausy, Carunia, ed. Strategi Pengembangan 
Ekonomi Kreatif di Indonesia. (Jakarta: Yayasan Pustaka 
Obor Indonesia, 2018), p. 56
Digitalization of Creative Markets
MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan | 169
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173; E-ISSN 2656-9477
scale, integration is carried out with district/
city officials and the creative community in 
Lampung. In the case of Pak Tejo, the market 
secretary also shows the feeling of belonging 
to the organization. As an active member of 
the Indonesian National Police, he channels 
his authority by inviting street musicians to 
enliven Pak Tejo with music. Likewise, with 
the PawangMacan, good management creates 
a feeling of belonging to the organization as 
indicated by the contribution of the Village 
Government, Farmers' Group Associations, 
Women's Farmers' Groups, and educational 
institutions. Each has the same vision, together 
to build a village and think of solutions to 
phenomena that occur in the community.
d. Social Development Planning
The next indicator of economic resilience 
is social development planning. Payungi 
represents this indicator with 'driver-friendly 
programs, women's environmental studies, 
and child-friendly programs. Each of them 
targets social development in the segment of 
village empowerment, women's rights, and 
education methods for children. Meanwhile, 
Pak Tejo represents this indicator through a 
marketer program for all residents of RT 06 to 
suppress usury transactions and increase citizen 
awareness to be technology literate and an effort 
to improve the standard of living together.
Conclusion
The digitalization of the creative market is 
proven to encourage positive family economic 
growth, such as the fulfillment of secondary 
and tertiary needs, education savings and old 
age savings, the satisfaction of tuition fees, 
fulfillment of kitchen utensils, and many more. 
Another indication of family economic growth 
is also marked by developing fundamental 
aspects that support the creative economy, 
such as creativity, innovation, and invention. 
These three aspects can further influence creative 
business opportunities that are more wide open, 
more diverse livelihoods, easier to find additional 
income, souvenirs typical of tourist areas and 
tourist city titles, and many more.
In addition, family relations are also 
involved in the economic resilience of the 
community. This is shown through the role 
of the family not only verbally supporting but 
manifested in the form of active contributions 
such as helping the production process, 
preparing places, helping upload electronic 
marketing media, and even trading with 
other relatives. Although not optimal in all 
indicators of economic resilience, each market 
has its characteristics in strengthening family 
economic resilience, namely by supporting 
which indicators are considered urgent to be 
implemented immediately.
References
Adnyani, Ni Ketut Sari, and Dewa Ayu Eka 
Agustini. “Digitalisasi Sebagai Pemulihan 
Perekonomian di Sektor Kerja Dalam 
mendukung Kebangkitan UMKM di 
Provinsi Bali.” Jurnal Pengabdian Masyarakat 
Media Ganesha Fhis 1, no. 2 (2020).
Ajis. Interview about Digitalization of Creative 
Markets in Encouraging Family Economic 
Growth, September 2, 2021
Ansori, Aan. “Digitalisasi Ekonomi Syariah.” 
Islamiconomic: Jurnal Ekonomi Keuangan 
Dan Bisnis Islam 7, no. 1 (2016).
Azizah, SitiNur, and Muhfiatun. “Pengembangan 
Ekonomi Kreatif Berbasis Kearifan Lokal 
Pandanus Handicraft dalam Menghadapi 
Pasar Modern Perspektif Ekonomi Syariah 
(Study Case di Pandanus Nusa Sambisari 
Yogyakarta).” Aplikasia: Jurnal Aplikasi Ilmu- 
ilmu Agama 17, no. 2 (February 12, 2018). 
https ://doi .org/10.14421/apl ikas ia .
v17i2.1273.
Siti Zulaikha, Enny Puji Lestari , Titut Sudiono, Maulana Husen S
170 | MIZANI: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi dan Keagamaan
Volume 8, No. 2, 2021
ISSN 2355-5173; E-ISSN 2656-9477
Firdausy, Carunia, ed. Strategi Pengembangan 
Ekonomi Kreatif di Indonesia. Jakarta: Yayasan 
PustakaObor Indonesia, 2018, Cet. ke-2.
Imron, Ali, and Muhammad Syafa’at. “Revitalisasi 
Home Industry Berbasis Modal Sosial Sebagai 
Strategi Ketahanan Ekonomi Menghadapi 
Pandemi Covid-19,” n.d.,
Kharisma, Linang. Interview about Digitalization 
of Creative Markets in Encouraging Family 
Economic Growth, September 3, 2021.
Kurnia, Ana. Interview about Digitalization of 
Creative Markets in Encouraging Family 
Economic Growth, September 3, 2021.
Martan, Ahmad Jio. Interview about Digitalization 
of Creative Markets in Encouraging Family 
Economic Growth, September 4, 2021.
Melan, and Rosa. Interview about Digitalization 
of Creative Markets in Encouraging Family 
Economic Growth, September 3, 2021.
Melsya, Novia Shinta. Interview about Digitali-
zation of Creative Markets in Encouraging 
Family Economic Growth, September 2, 
2021.
Menteri Perdagangan Republik Indonesia. 
Perkembangan Ekonomi Kreatif Indonesia 
2025, 2008.
Mita. Interview about Digitalization of Creative 
Markets in Encouraging Family Economic 
Growth, September 4, 2021.
Kreatif, BadanEkonomi. Infografis Sebaran 
Pelaku Ekonomi Kreatif. Jakarta, 2019.
Mulyana, Slamet, Meria Octavianti, and Nadila 
Zahara Faradysa. “Pengelolaan Media 
Sosial Sebagai Media Promosi Pasar Digital 
Cikundul Sukabumi,” no. 1 (2019)
Nurrachmi, Intan, Setiawan. “Peran Koperasi 
Syariah Sebagai Pusat Kegiatan Muamalah 
Jamaah Masjid (Studi Kasus Koperasi 
Syariah Baitul Mu’min Komplek Pasir Jati, 
Desa Jati Endah Kecamatan Cilengkrang 
Kabupaten Bandung)”, Jurnal Ilmiah 
Mizani, Vol. 7, No. 1 (2020).
Nurakhimah, Atik. Interview with Customers 
about Digitalization of Creative Markets 
in Encouraging Family Economic Growth, 
September 2, 2021.
Pangestu, DR Mari Elka. “Hasil Konvensi 
Pengembangan Ekonomi Kreatif 2009-
2015,” June 2008
Purnomo, Rochmat Aldy. Ekonomi Kreatif : 
Pilar Pembangunan Indonesia. ZiyadVisi 
Media, 2016.
Rofaida, Rofi, Suryana, Asti NurAryanti, 
and Yoga Perdana. “Strategi Inovasi pada 
Industri Kreatif Digital: Upaya Memperoleh 
Keunggulan Bersaing pada Era Revolusi 
Industri 4.0.” Jurnal Manajemen dan 
Keuangan 8, no. 3 (June 11, 2020).
Sari, Anggri Puspita, Muhammad Faisal AR 
Pelu, Indah Kusuma Dewi, Marthinus 
Ismail, Robert Tua Siregar, Nina Mistriani, 
Elisabeth Lenny Marit, et al. Ekonomi 
Kreatif. Yayasan Kita Menulis, 2020.
Shofa, Ikhwanus. “Pertumbuhan Dan Strategi 
Pengembangan Ekonomi Kreatif Kota 
Malang.” Jurnal Pangrita 1, no. 1 (2018).
Sholikhatin, SitiAlvi, Wanda Fitrianingsih, 
and Sahira Dhiyaulhaq. “Pelatihan Digital 
Marketing Bagi Anggota Nasyiatul Aisyiyah 
Purbalingga Dalam Menghadapi Era 
Pasar Global Dan Pengembangan Industri 
Kreatif ” 4 (n.d.).
Yunita. Interview about Digitalization of 
Creative Markets in Encouraging Family 
Economic Growth, September 4, 2021.
Zumaroh, “Bisnis Haram Dan Pengaruhnya 
Terhadap Fisik Dan Psikis Manusia”, Jurnal 
Ilmiah Mizani, Vol. 4, No. 2 (2017).
