The Ability of Positive Adaptation and Students’ Attitudes towards Economic Migrations

The Ability of Positive Adaptation and Students’Attitudes towards Economic MigrationsPiotr Kwiatkowski / e-mail: pkdomx@gmail.comInstitut of Pedagogy, Uniwersity of Wrocław, PolandKwiatkowski, P. (2015). The Ability of Positive Adaptation and Students’ Attitudestowards Economic Migration. Czech-Polish Historical and Pedagogical Journal,7/2, 39–49.On the basis of the conducted analyses it can be stated that there are relationsbetween trait resilience and attitude towards emigration, sense of behaviouralcontrol in this area and previous experience of temporary work abroad. Resilienceis not significantly correlated with subjective norm, emigrant’s prototype, orpatriotic attitude, although in all the cases one can notice a pattern of averagesconcurrent with the assumed tendency. The resilience-trait can be a significantfactor in activity and mobility on the labour market. Key words: Economic Migration; Students; Attitudes; Resilience; Personality TraitsEconomic migration is a common phenomenon. It can be perceivedfrom different perspectives: sociological, cultural, economic, historical,and psychological ones. Migration is connected with the processes ofglobalisation, however, its basic conditionings lie in the discrepanciesbetween the levels of economic development of different countries. Inevery economy there can be found a number of factors that eitheraccelerate or inhibit this process. Economic factors influence thewillingness to migrate on the social level because of their impact on livingconditions (the ability to fulfil people’s needs) as well as the perception ofeconomic changes and the people’s expectations about their lifechances and dangers in the future. Research on economic migrationsuggests that the main cause of going abroad is the dissatisfaction withthe income that one receives in one’s home country or the lack of income(in the case of the unemployed) and the low level of the fulfilment of socialand economic needs.1 In the report (Diagnoza społeczna) it has beenpointed out that 8.3% of the employed and 22.9% of the unemployeddeclare the willingness to emigrate for economic reasons, whichconstitutes a relatively high percentage when compared with the total1 Kryńska E. (2000). Mobilność zasobów pracy. Analiza i metody stymulacji. Warszawa.Czech-Polish Historical and Pedagogical Journal 39emigration in the years 2011–2013 (approximately 2%).2 This means thatthe number of people who declare the willingness to emigrate is a fewtimes higher than that of the people who in fact do.According to yet another important study one-seventh of therespondents work abroad or have worked abroad since Poland joined theEuropean Union, over 2/3 personally know someone who has workedabroad, and every fourth respondent has declared the readiness to finda job abroad.3 However, there are some differences pertaining to age:the percentages of people declaring the readiness to look for workabroad or their plans to try to find a job abroad are highest among theyoungest respondents, that is, those aged 18–24 (39%). The percentageincidence of the willingness to emigrate systematically decreases withage.In the Diagnoza spoleczna 2013 it has been presented, in turn, that 30%of economic emigrants from the years 2007–2011 emigrated again in theyears 2011–2013. Thus, the great majority have no repeated emigrationexperiences, which might be the result of a failure to fulfil the plansconnected with emigration, as well as with the successful fulfilment of all thegoals of the emigration. What appears particularly interesting is that amongthe people who have returned from emigration there is a higher percentageof those who are now professionally active in Poland than of those who areprofessionally passive. Authors of the report have not shown any data thatcould make possible the establishment of the relationships betweenemigrational experiences and being active on the labour market. One canonly speculate that emigrational experiences make people more creative atwork or that economic migration and the willingness to pro-actively look forsources of income have a common source. If the latter interpretation iscorrect, it suggests that among the possible influences there are somesubjective factors, not only situational ones.AssumptionsIn the present paper I intend to assume the psychologicalperspective. To be more precise, I am interested in decision making inthe economic migration of young adults. That is because in thepsychological sense economic migration can be understood as an active40 Piotr Kwiatkowski2 Diagnoza społeczna 2013. Raport. (2014). Czapiński J., Panek, T. (Eds.) Warszawa:Instytut Pracy i Spraw Socjalnych.3 Poakcesyjne migracje zarobkove (2013). Warszawa. Fundacja Centrum Badania OpiniiSpołecznej.form of problem-focused coping. I treat economic migration asa deliberate action aimed to solve a problem in one’s life.Nevertheless, one ought to take into account the fact that the decisionto emigrate for economic reasons is often made in the situation of an innerconflict. It is a probably an approach-avoidance conflict. Apart from theprofits that may be gained an individual assesses the risks and costs ofemigration. Making the decision is typically a long process of reflectionand planning connected with a change in one’s life. This process canlead to formulating an intention in the discussed area. Intention is to beunderstood as a conscious, verbalised intention to undertake a certainaction within a defined period. Intention precedes purposeful action.According to the Theory of Planned Behaviour intention can be treatedas a conscious state of readiness to perform a given action, and it isconditioned by three factors: attitude toward the behaviour, subjectivenorm, and behavioural control.4 Attitude is a balance of the convictionsabout the benefits and the costs of performing a behaviour, weighedaccording to the importance that the subject attaches to them. Subjectivenorm is the conviction about what one’s significant others expect of anindividual performing (or not) a given behaviour, weighed as theindividual’s motivation to meet these expectations. Perceived behaviouralcontrol is the conviction about the possibly to successfully perform anaction. It originates in the evaluation of the achievability of a goal and ofone’s own competence. It can be proposed that this theory suggests thatthe decision to perform an action is based on the subjective evaluation ofits reasonableness, normality, and achievability of the purposeful action.In consonance with the discussed theory, behaviour is a function ofintention and perceived behavioural control, and intention isa consequence of attitude, subjective norm, and the sense of behaviouralcontrol. Furthermore, it is assumed that all the other causative factors inthe origins of an action influence behaviour through these three indicators.There is a number of attempts to broaden the discussed theory. Itseems that the most important of them is the Prototype/WillingnessTheory5, which introduces some significant modifications: firstly,perceived behavioural control has been substituted by previousbehaviour, with the assumption that having performed the same or similarCzech-Polish Historical and Pedagogical Journal 414 Ajzen, I. (1991). Theory of Planned Behavior. In Organizational Behavior and HumanDecision Processes, 50(2), 179-211. DOI: 10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T5 Gibbons, F. X. – Gerrard, M. – Blanton, H. – Russell, D. W. (1998). Reasoned action andsocial reaction: Willingness and intention and independent predictors of health risk.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(5), 1164-1181. DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.74.5.1164behaviour in the past makes it more likely that it will performed again inthe future, as a result of habit or rationalisation. Secondly, in place ofintention two coupled constructs are introduced: intention andwillingness. As aforementioned, intention is a conscious purpose of doingsomething. Willingness, in turn, is a tendency to benefit from anopportunity. The modification is substantial, because actions in humanlife are not only the result of precedent planning – their character is oftenopportunistic. What is more, since the times of Freud it has been knownthat many human actions are regulated subconsciously. Thus, infavourable conditions a motivation to act may arise that is grounded in anindividual’s personality structures. The third modification consists in theaddition of the element termed prototype. Prototype is the convictionabout the information that an individual gives about themselves to otherswhen acting in a particular way. If an individual is convinced that a certainway of acting shows a person in a favourable light, the individual is thenmore willing to perform such actions.If we try to learn of the readiness of an individual to emigrate foreconomic reasons we must first specify whether we want to know aboutintention or willingness, or if we want to unify both the constructs.Unification is justified inasmuch as in reality the measurements of intentionand willingness are correlated, which is why when inquiring about one ofthe variables we receive an answer determined by the other variable. Thatis why, even though mathematical calculations can be employed toseparate the variables of both factors in analyses of correlations, I havedecided to aggregate both the measures, thus creating a construct underthe working name of “readiness for economic emigration”.In order to provide a reliable diagnosis of this readiness it should notonly be investigated on the  basis of the declarations of wanting toemigrate or to take advantage of an opportunity to take up work abroad,but, in accordance with the theories presented above, one ought to alsotake into account the affective/cognitive indicators of such readiness:attitude, subjective norm, prototype, behavioural control, and previousemigrational behaviours. All of them were taken into consideration in theresearch presented in this paper. However, the catalogue of dependentvariables has been extended. I introduced a variable under the workingname of “patriotic stance”. It appeared important to me, because in thePolish society there is a significant group of “eurosceptics”, “anti-globalists”, and “nationalists”. Those supporting the above worldviewsmight have a negative perception of economic emigration.42 Piotr Kwiatkowski6 Werner, E. E., & Smith, R. S. (1982). Vulnerable but invincible: A longitudinal study ofresilient children and youth. New York: Adams, Bannister & Cox.The aim of the research presented below was to find the answer to thequestion about the relation between readiness for economic emigration(and its various determinants) and an individual’s ability of positiveadaptation (termed trait resilience). Resilience is a term pertaining to the ability to cope with difficulties,stress, and social pressure. The phenomenon has been described byscholars investigating the adaptation of children burdened with a highnumber of factors extremely adverse to development. It has beenobserved that not all children subject to an accumulation of adversefactors in their environments present abnormal development trajectoriesor behaviour disorders.6 About 1/3 of the population appear to beresilient, which is a substantial group. A number of authors have tried toexplain the phenomenon. However, this is not a place to present theentire catalogue of factors facilitating positive adaptation. Let us state,then, that the sources of resilience are the constructive influences ofsignificant others, of the broader social environment, and certain personaltraits. Thus, there exist personal and external resources that allow anindividual to successfully counteract disturbing factors. What is more, ithas been observed that the discussed resilience is not stable, but it isformed in a developmental process. One of the important conclusions ofthe scholars of resilience is the fact that it is formed in real confrontationswith life problems rather than conditions of isolation from negative factors.Thus, it may be called an inoculation mechanism, that is, a reasonableexposure of a child to various tasks requiring effort to adapt which resultsin the increase in resilience, analogously to hyper-compensation in sport.The above assumption directs our attention to the intrapsychologicalmechanisms determining the ability to adapt positively despite beingburdened with risk factors. It can be stated that the ability of positiveadaptation can be understood as an individual trait that differentiatespeople. In psychology attempts have been made to define this ability. Atleast a few ought to be mentioned. They are the sense of coherence7,hardiness8, ego-strength9 as well as ego-control and ego-resiliency10.They are multidimensional constructs, even though their elements areCzech-Polish Historical and Pedagogical Journal 437 Antonovsky, A. (1987). Unraveling the mystery of health: how people manage stress andstay well. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.8 Kobasa, S. C. (1979). Stressful life events, personality and health: An inquiry into hardiness.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(1), 1–11. DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.37.1.19 Erikson, E. H. (1964). Insight and responsibility. New York: Norton.10 Block, J. H., & Block, J. (1980). The role of ego-control and ego-resiliency in theorganization of behavior. In W. A. Collins (Ed.). Development of cognition, affect, andsocial relations: The Minnesota symposia on child psychology (Vol. 13) (pp. 39–101).Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.closely correlated, which is why treating them as single variables isjustified. One should also note that these superior constructs are alsointerconnected, that is, they have a common core. They can bepresented on a single plain. What is more, the above plain includesa number of other human traits, such as emotional intelligence, criticalthinking, and taking care of oneself. The correlations are so powerful thatthey justify the inclusion of these variables in the aforementioned generalcategory11. The traditional traits mentioned above are connected with theoptimal course of the development process in favourable environmentalconditions. However, contemporarily a number of data in neurogeneticshave been collected that clearly indicate the genetic background of thediscussed competence. Adaptive abilities are undoubtedly dependenton the activity of the genes coding neurotransmitting. It is first andforemost connected with the genes responsible for serotonergic anddopaminergic paths in the brain. The key mechanisms here consist inbalancing the influences of the limbic system by the controlling influencesof the prefrontal cortex. The balance is achieved late in ontogenesis,typically after the age of 2512. Lasting disturbances in this process resultfrom gene-environment interplay in the earlier development stages. Anexample of such interplay is the interaction of the gene codingmonoamine oxidase with experiences of violence or neglect in earlychildhood. Personality disorders develop in persons with the mentionedexperiences, but the form of these disorders results from the qualities ofthe genotype. Alleles of the MAO-A gene causing an increase in theavailability of serotonin in the synapses in the interaction with child abuseincrease the probability of the antisocial disorder, and the alleles of thisgene that cause a drop in the availability of serotonin lead to an increasedrisk of depressive and anxiety disorders. Regardless of theaforementioned factors, childhood trauma leads to permanent changes inthe limbic system and the prefrontal cortex, the symptom of which isa lowered self-control, that is, the control over the experienced emotionsand the behaviour. The main cause here is stress and the resultingsecretion of cortisol by the adrenal cortex. Cortisol activates certainreceptors in the brain, which triggers a cascade of changes leading tonegative structural changes in the brain which, in turn, lead to permanent44 Piotr Kwiatkowski11 Kwiatkowski, P. (2012). Profilaktyka zachowań narkotykowych młodzieży w kontekściekoncepcji resilience. In W Z. B. Gaś (Ed.). Człowiek w obliczu zniewolenia. Od zagrożeńdo nadziei (pp. 169–194). Lublin: Innovatio Press.12 Steinberg, L. (2007). Risk taking in adolescence new perspectives from brain andbehavioral science. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16(2), 55–59. DOI:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00475.xdecrease in the ability to successfully regulate emotional processes.It can be stated that the above scientific observations justify theperception of the ability of positive adaptation as an individual trait. It isassumed that the trait is a certain type of an adaptive resource: one’sability to use other resources depends on it. In this way, theaforementioned sense of coherence or ego-strength can be verygenerally defined. I believe that the most universal formula for thedefinition of the above quality is formed by the psychological concepts ofwisdom. Due to a lack of space they are not discussed here. I will limitmyself to stating that wisdom is often perceived as the ability of anindividual to manage their behaviour in a way that allows for therealisation of personal qualities with consideration for the good of thesociety and nurturing personal relationships. Self-control is one of thefundaments of this ability.Trait resilience as a quality facilitating effective use of the resourcesavailable to an individual facilitates (1) undertaking optimal copingactivities in difficult situations, (2) keeping up the activities in spite ofproblems as well as (3) modifying the activities when the situation calls forit. The result of such functioning is the preservation of psychologicalintegrity and a positive self-image.The Aim of the Research and the MethodThe aim of the research presented below was to define the relationsbetween the ability of positive adaptation and readiness for economicemigration and its indicators. The research pertains to the people who,being students of the last semester, have no secured stable income anddeclare discomfort connected with this fact. Married individuals andthose in stable informal relationships have been eliminated from thesample. To put it simply – only singles were studied. That is how theinfluence of many variables connected with social relations waseliminated. The statistical control of these variables would require a muchlarger sample. 120 students were studied. However, the final researchonly included 92 students of various higher schools in Wrocław: 43 maleand 49 female. This year all the students will complete their studies (fulltime or extramural) and they have no intention of taking up doctoralstudies. Initial analyses have shown no differences between the gendersin relation to trait resilience and emigrational plans. That is why therespondents’ gender is not taken into account in the statistics. The first step in the analyses was to define two groups formingopposite extremes in trait resilience. The measurement of the discussedCzech-Polish Historical and Pedagogical Journal 45trait was conducted with the use of the RESIL-17 Scale.13 It is a tool ofdocumented reliability and accuracy. Trait resilience consists of threesource traits: positive attitude to oneself, ability to confront others, andself-control. That is why an overarching indicator of the three traits wasused. After ranking, 30 respondent with the lowest score were selectedand 30 with the highest score. Thus, two extreme comparative groupswere formed. Further analyses consisted in comparisons between the groups, inwhich the dependent variables were set as the indicators of readiness foreconomic emigration. The table below contains information about thedependent variables and the methods of their operationalization. Exceptfor one of the variables, bipolar scales (type: semantic differential) wereused, two scales for each variable. The one exception are the previousemigrational behaviours, which were measured by a single questionabout the number of months spent abroad over the last 2 years (foreconomic or educational reasons). Because of the conciseness of themeasurement tool for dependent variables, it was not possible toestablish the internal reliability of any of the subscales. Let us only note,therefore, that the particular pairs of items were significantly correlated.The results of the particular subscales (except for one) could fall in therange between 2 and 12 points. All the variables used in the calculationswere given in a standardised form. The measurement of previousemigrational experiences brought a range of results between 0 and 6months. The results were also recorded in the form of Z-score.Research resultsThe general hypothesis stating that persons with a high indicator oftrait resilience show a higher readiness for emigrational behaviours thanwith a lower level of this trait has been verified. I believed that the aboveassumption was justified in the context of the criteria of the selection ofrespondents. The population consisted of young people without a stablesource of income and experiencing discomfort because of this fact.Majority of the respondent expected great difficulties in finding satisfyingemployment where they lived. Consequently, it is highly probable thatmany respondents are undergoing a crisis connected with having to takeup responsibility for their own adult lives. In such situation it can be46 Piotr Kwiatkowski13 Kwiatkowski, P. (2012). Profilaktyka zachowań narkotykowych młodzieży w kontekściekoncepcji resilience. In Gaś, Z. B. (Ed.). Człowiek w obliczu zniewolenia. Od zagrożeńdo nadziei (pp. 169–194). Lublin: Innovatio Press.expected that the trait resilience that determines effective use ofresources might facilitate the tendency to perceive economic emigrationas an interesting perspective for the future. Resilient individuals are lessprone to anxiety and less emotionally labile, and they are more sociallycompetent, autonomous, and able to take care of themselves. Thesetraits may influence the readiness to emigrate through perceivedbehavioural control as well as a more positive attitude towards emigration(balance of profits and costs). It is more difficult to find relations betweentrait resilience and the remaining indicators of readiness to emigrate.Results of the analyses are presented in the table below. Significanceof the differences between the compared groups has been measuredwith the use of the t-Student test. All the dependent variables in theanalyses have been standardised (Z-score) in the entire sample of 92persons. This means that the results above 0 are higher than the averageCzech-Polish Historical and Pedagogical Journal 47Dependent variables Quantity of items Examples of items Willingness to emigrate 2 It’s my intention to go to work abroad for at least a few months during the next year vs. I’m definitely not going to work abroad over the next few years. Attitude toward emigration 2 I think that in my situation economic emigration would be a very reasonable choice. vs. Starting to work abroad brings more problems than benefits. Subjective norm 2 My close ones encourage me to go to work abroad. vs. My close ones would definitely oppose my going to work abroad. Emigrant's prototype 2 Poles are liked and respected abroad (they are welcome). vs. You often have to be ashamed of other Polish people, nobody respects them Perceived behavioural control 2 I would certainly be able to cope with all the problems connected with living abroad. vs. If I went abroad I would be afraid that I wouldn’t be able to cope with the problems there. Past behaviour 1 How many months have you spent working or studying abroad over the last two years? ……………. Patriotic attitude 2 Nowadays Poles should take particular care of national issues. vs. I think patriotism is stupid. Table 1. Operationalization of dependent variables – measures.in the entire sample, and the results below 0 are lower than average.Standard deviation in the entire sample is 1. In the comparative groupsthe standard deviations may vary.On the basis of the conducted analyses it can be stated that there arerelations between trait resilience and attitude towards emigration(p=0.012), sense of behavioural control in this area (p=0.004) andprevious experience of temporary work abroad (p=0.031). Resilience isnot significantly correlated with subjective norm, emigrant’s prototype, orpatriotic attitude, although in all the cases one can notice a pattern ofaverages concurrent with the assumed tendency. Particular indicators ofreadiness and the very indicator of behavioural willingness are alwayshigher in the group of resilient persons. A reverse tendency can be seenin relation to patriotic attitude, but it is not statistically significant. Takinginto account the above findings and the existence of relations betweenbehavioural willingness indicators, aggregation of all of the aboveindicators is justified. Sum of the standardised values made it possible toarrive at a general measure of readiness for economic emigration. It wasstandardised and correlated with the standardised general result in theRESIL-17 scale. The correlation between the two variables is 0.34 and it isstatistically significant (p=0.001). This means that with the increase of thelevel of resilience students’ readiness for economic emigration increases(for students who are completing their studies, who are in a difficultfinancial situation, and who see little chance to find a job where they live).48 Piotr Kwiatkowskins = not significant, RESIL = high scale result, resil = low scale resultDependent variables Comparative groups Statistics Mean  (standard deviation) Test t (p-level) Willingness to emigrate RESIL +0,23  (1,17) 1,36 (ns) resil -0,14  (0,92) Attitude toward emigration RESIL +0,38  (1,03) 2,697 (0,012) resil -0,31  (0,95) Subjective norm RESIL +0,12  (1,09) 0,726 (ns) resil -0,07  (0,93) Emigrant's prototype RESIL +0,29  (1,32) 1,371 (ns) resil -0,11  (0,90) Perceived behavioural control RESIL +0,47  (1,06) 3,172 (0,004) resil -0,37  (0,99) Past behaviour RESIL +0,42  (1,24) 2,266 (0,031) resil -0,49  (0,89) Patriotic attitude RESIL -0,22  (1,02) 1,593 (ns) resil +0,21  (1,07) Table 2. Trait resilience and dependent variables – a statistical analysis.ConclusionsThe above results appear to be concurrent with the assumption aboutthe existence of a personal factor conditioning the ability of positiveadaptation. However, the presented relations are weak and they havebeen found in a small sample. Consequently, one ought to be carefulwhen drawing conclusions on their basis. There are probably also otherfactors conditioning readiness for economic emigration. It is conceivablethat trait resilience can modify the relations between this readiness andliving conditions or other causative factors. Testing them, nonetheless,requires a much bigger sample and the use of more refined statisticalmethods. The results presented above allow for the assumption that bydeveloping the traits forming the ability of positive adaptation (traitresilience) in the upbringing process we are raising individuals who cantake matters in their own hands, and who are ready to engage inemotionally difficult actions that, at the same time, provide the chance tobecome independent. The above trait can, therefore, be a significantfactor in activity and mobility on the labour market. In a broaderperspective trait resilience can be treated as an important element inindependence competences of a young person. From this perspective,what is advisable in upbringing is to provide the chance for the threefundaments of positive adaptation to develop: positive identity(perceiving oneself as a value, constructing the sense of a meaningfullife), social competence in confronting the environment (assertive attitudeand skills), and self-control (in the behavioural and emotional area).Czech-Polish Historical and Pedagogical Journal 49