The Atlantic City Experience: Casino Gambling as an Economic Recovery Program

Michael Hawkins is an Assistant Professor in the Department of UrbanPlanning of Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey. The authorreceived his B.A. from Howard University, his J.D. from Columbia LawSchool, and his M. C.P. from the Harvard Graduate School of Design.This article has been adapted from a paper given at the Fifth NationalConference on Gambling andRisk Taking, October 23, 1981. The author,in his article, discusses the issue of casino gambling as an economicrecovery program.THE ATLANTIC CITY EXPERIENCE:CASINO GAMBLING AS ANECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMby Michael HawkinsOverviewThis article examines three current issues surrounding the develop-ment, profitability, and future of casino gambling as an economic recoveryprogram. The Atlantic City experience is reviewed. A partial "fiscal im-pact" analysis looks at the municipal costs and benefits in the AtlanticCity area; profitability declines allegedly caused by Casino Control Com-mission overregulation are discussed; and the future of casino gambling asan economic recovery program is considered.Casino gambling in Atlantic City, NewJersey, is now more than fouryears old. The referendum amending the state constitution was passed bythe voters in 1976. The Casino Control Act was passed by the legislature in1977. The first casino, Resorts International, opened approximately oneyear later in late May 1978.In the more than four years since casino gambling began, AtlanticCounty communities have experienced substantial, growth-relatedchanges. Effective tax rates declined, property values rose (quite substan-tially in some cases), and a growing population grew more rapidly. Thesefactors suggest substantial benefits; however, costs have been high and todate appear to have exceeded benefits. Many of the costs will continue asdevelopment needs are addressed. These costs include: (a) heavy infra-structure, like sewage and waste treatment and disposal facilities; (b)major public capital facilities, like schools, roads, municipal office space,and hospitals; (c) social service programs; and (d) housing, all categories ofrental as well as moderate-income, privately-owned units.The rapid pace of growth is directly related to rapid casino-hoteldevelopment. Nine casinos, each with approximately 4,000 employees,have opened in Atlantic City in four years.While the casino industry has brought prosperity and expectations ofa brighter future to the area, the industry must direct some of its energiestoward assisting government in solving the growth problems.* The views expressed herein are solely those of the author, not of the State of New Jersey or anysubdivision thereunder nor of the Seton Hall Legislative Journal or Seton Hall Law Center.SETON HALL LEGISLA TIVE JOURNALThe unknown market potential of casino gambling in the northeast-ern United States was clarified by the success of Resorts International's firstseven months. They realized $156 million in gross income which repre-sented a 200% return on equity. The rush to develop casinos resulted inthe rapid opening of eight additional casino-hotels.As competition increased and profitability per casino declined, theindustry accused the Casino Control Commission of depressing profitsthrough overregulation. Industry officials suggested that competitionmade some regulation unnecessary.A review of financial statements of eight operating casinos disclosedlarge variations in expenditures. It is suggested that poor management andinitial runaway spending by casino developers must shoulder much of theblame for the cost environment. Further, rather than decry the regulatoryposture of the Commission, the industry should improve its internalmanagement.This article suggests that revitalization of Atlantic City is an impor-tant area of potential profit. A better total environment in Atlantic Cityshould attract more and higher income patrons with diverse interests. Atotally revitalized Atlantic City requires increased industry assistance.Moreover, it is suggested, casino gambling was supported by the voters ofNew Jersey in order to improve Atlantic City. The improvements have notoccurred and the patience of New Jersey and Atlantic City residents, aswell as political and administrative overseers, is wearing thin.Finally, it is contended that although casino gambling has potentialas a revitalization tool, that potential is not being realized in AtlanticCity. And time is running out. Time to convince other states that casinogambling offers benefits that exceed costs is also running out. AtlanticCity is viewed as the model and the model's tinsel glitter veneer does nothide the substantial social disarray that was and is Atlantic City.IntroductionIn 1974, New Jersey voters rejected casino gambling by a margin of529,000 votes. Two years later, on November 2, 1976, the voters reversedthis position and approved casino gambling by a 350,000 vote margin.'Many of Atlantic City's citizens voted for gambling (61,719 for and13,930 against) because they arguably feared a continuation of the desper-ate economic plight of this once great summer resort. Unemployment hadI See N.J. CONST. art. 4, § 7, para. 2(D).[Vol. 6:85ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMexceeded 40% during the nine-month off-season and, for more than tenyears, summer business continued a steady and deep decline.While gambling has brought jobs to many and a brighter careerfuture to some, its social destructiveness, like initial casino profit esti-mates, has far exceeded projections, which were themselves ominous. In1979, then Casino Control Commission Chairman Joseph Lordi told theNew Jersey Conference of Mayors that the experiment of using casinos as"a unique tool of redevelopment" was working. Recently, however, uponretirement, Mr. Lordi stated that "[m]ore remain(s) to be done, includingsolving Atlantic City's housing, transportation and Convention Hall prob-lems. I do not think the rest of the city has developed fast enough."This article will attempt to answer several questions:1. Do costs exceed benefits in this rapid-growth environment? Overwhat geographical area do municipal costs and benefits reach?What municipal services experience the largest increase?2. Does overregulation explain narrowing profit margins of individ-ual casino complexes? Is each casino deriving maximum benefitsfrom each of its departments? Are there apparent operationalinefficiencies among the casinos?3. Has the severe distress status of Atlantic City improved since theintroduction of casino gambling? Have other states decided tointroduce casino gambling as an economic recovery program?Have their decisions been influenced by events in Atlantic City?These questions will be examined by: (1) a partial fiscal impactanalysis; (2) industry profitability within the context of the recent casinoindustry charge of overregulation by the Casino Control Commission; and(3) a projection of the future of casino gambling as a redevelopment toolboth in Atlantic City and in other states.Fiscal ImpactA. Population and HousingThe population and housing statistics for Atlantic County and Atlan-tic City tell two different stories for the 1970's. Population growth hasbeen rapid in Atlantic County since 1976.2 Those communities that hadan existing housing stock capable of housing additional people have2 BUREAU OF THE CENSUS, U.S. DEP'T OF COMMERCE, 1980 CENSUS OF POPULATION ANDHOUSING, ADVANCE REPORT at 4 (March 1981).19821SETON HALL LEGISLA TIVE JOURNALreceived the largest population increases. 3 Coincidentally, those areas areclose to Atlantic City. Those municipalities along the beachfront northand south of Atlantic City as well as the off-shore communities ofPleasantville City, Northfield City, Linwood City, Egg Harbor City, EggHarbor Township, Galloway Township, Ventnor, and Somers Point havereceived the most substantial growth. In the meantime, the population ofAtlantic City actually declined between 1970 and 1980.1 Much of thecity's decline was due to the rapid loss of housing stock. While AtlanticCounty's housing stock increased by approximately 21%, Atlantic Cityactually lost 10.5 % of its housing units5 through fires, neglect, and aging.Thus, even if people were willing to live in the city, the housing unitswere not available for them. George Sternlieb of the Rutgers UniversityCenter for Urban Policy Research recently noted that, in order to resolveAtlantic City's housing crisis, the city must immediately address theproblem of rapidly dwindling housing stock. 6The New Jersey Department of Community Affairs ("DCA") sug-gested that by 1982 Atlantic City would host twelve casinos, 7 attracting anadditional 340,000 persons, and raising Atlantic County's population to530,000.8 The report noted that this projection greatly exceeds theState's policy projection 9 of a 311,000 person increase for AtlanticCounty by the year 2000.10 The casino-generated growth is expected torequire 130,000 new housing units by 1982.1' To meet this demand, thecurrent rate of 2,843 building permits a year would have to increase toapproximately 43,000 per year for the next three years.12Even if it were physically possible to absorb this projected growth,New Jersey's policy on the Pinelands1 3 is in direct conflict with such an3Id.Id. at 8.I d. at 4.6 Meeting between George Sternlieb of the Rutgers University Center for Urban Policy Research,members of the Casino Control Commission, and the author at the Eagleton Institute of Politics(August 20, 1981).1 NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, REVIEW OF THE PROBABLE IMPACT OF ATLANTICCITY CASINO DEVELOPMENT at 21 (January 1980).Id.See generally NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, A REVISED HOUSING ALLOCATIONREPORT FOR NEW JERSEY (May 1978).10 Id. at 23.1 NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, REVIEW OF THE PROBABLE IMPACT OF ATLANTICCITY CASINO DEVELOPMENT at 4 (January 1980).12 Id." The NewJersey Pinelands is a million acre forest expanse covering all or parts of 52 municipali-ties. The area is considered one of the nation's premier environmental treasures. See I NEW JERSEY[Vol. 6:85ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMattempt. As of October 31, 1979, when the DCA report was published,the Pinelands Commision14 had approved only 586 units I5 in AtlanticCounty.The projected 60% of casino employees who will require low ormoderate income housing add to the housing problem. More subsidizedunits are needed in Atlantic County alone than the amount allocated bythe Federal Government for the entire State of New Jersey.16Due to the increased cost of rental housing, it appears that only 40%of casino employees can afford to live in Atlantic City. Many casinoemployees are living in rooms costing $50 a week. Steep developmentcosts have resulted in $500 per month rent for a newly-built efficiency unitwhich clearly does not meet the needs of the local employment market.17The result is that many employees must commute substantial distances.Although employees of the first three casinos were able to live close to thecasinos, the employees of subsequent casinos commute from thirty-five tofifty miles to work.'To reduce the time it takes to travel to work, many employees chooseto park on the streets of Atlantic City rather than in the parking lotsprovided for them outside of Atlantic City. They then compete with bothvisitors and residents for the few available parking spaces. This situationhas recently prompted the city to put into operation a residential parkingsticker system whereby only residents of Atlantic City who possess parkingstickers or their guests will be allowed to park on the street overnight.Roadway "gridlock" is a reality during rush hour in Atlantic Citytoday. Until the needed housing is constructed within the city limits andPINELANDS COMM'N, NEW JERSEY PINELANDS: DRAFT COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN at Intro-duction (June 1980). The Pinelands Protection Act, N.J. STAT. ANN. §§ 13:18A-1 to -29 (West Supp.1981-1982), seeks to regulate land use activity through a regional plan and management structure.14 The Pinelands Commission was appointed by Governor Brendan T. Byrne pursuant to N.J.STAT. ANN. §§ 13:18A-4 and -5 (West Supp. 1981-1982) to provide interim management anddevelop a comprehensive management plan to balance preservation and development of the Pine-lands.Is NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, REVIEW OF THE PROBABLE IMPACT OF ATLANTICCITY CASINO DEVELOPMENT at 4 (January 1980).16 The federal Section 8 program's housing allocation for New Jersey was 10,964 units in 1979.The 1982 projected need for assisted housing in Atlantic County alone is for 59,000 units. Id. at 4, 32.11 A recent 24-story high-rise apartment complex in Atlantic City projected rents as follows: (a)Efficiencies - $466 per month; (b) One bedroom - $680 per month; (c) Two bedrooms - $784 permonth. Data derived from author's discussions with members of Atlantic County ImprovementAuthority (September 1981).IS Letter from William T. Hendricks, Office of Ridesharing, New Jersey Dep't of Transportation,to author (June 2, 1981).1982]SETON HALL LEGISLATIVE JOURNALthe number of commuters is thereby reduced, this situation cannot beexpected to change. In the meantime, the negative byproducts of inade-quate housing will include an increasing number of automobile collisionsand clashes of angry workers and visitors attempting to make their wayabout the city. The steadily worsening air pollution problem will continueunabated. The current housing crisis in the Atlantic City area has createdor aggravated these problems. If the limited available road capacity con-tinues to frustrate both employees and casino patrons, casino profitabilitymay diminish.B. Municipal BudgetsA review of the last four years' budgets of the various Atlantic Countymunicipalities, as well as the county budget, reveals substantial cost in-creases which can be reasonably attributed to the casino gambling indus-try.19 Most notably, fire and police protection costs have increased ap-proximately 50%. ° Planning, housing, and development costs haveskyrocketed. Municipal court costs are up substantially. 2' Public workscosts for street widening, for drainage corrections, and for sewage andsewage processing show substantial increases. 22 As expected, the cost ofgrowth touches all areas.C. Municipal Capital Improvement: Infrastructure DevelopmentThe six-year capital improvement plan for Atlantic City estimates itsbase line capital improvement costs for 1979 to 1984 at $51 million andthis amount covers only public safety, parks and recreation, water, sewerand sanitary waste improvements, and transportation. 23 Not covered inthat plan are the very substantial costs of renovating the Convention Halland constructing a modern transportation complex. These two projectsalone could cost nearly $400 million.24"I Compare generally NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, THIRTY-NINTH ANNUALREPORT OF THE DIVISION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES (1976) with the Annual Reports for theyears 1977 through 1980.20 Id.21 Id.22 Id.21 City Comm'n of Atlantic City, Atlantic City Master Plan, Six-Year Capital Improvement Planat 9 (1978).24 Id.[Vol. 6:85ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMLike many other mature economies, Atlantic City has seen very littlecapital investment during the last twenty years. Growth in Atlantic Citypeaked in the 1930's and the decline in growth has been accompanied bya decline in capital improvements. 25  The capital improvement plan de-veloped as part of the 1978 Master Plan for Atlantic City indicated thatsporadic improvements to the capital infrastructure between 1959 and1978 totaled around $20 million, or approximately $1 million a year.In addition to these general expenditures in the Atlantic City andAtlantic County budgets, one must add the lost revenues for which thelocal governments no longer qualify as the Atlantic City growth unfolds. 26D. Jobs and TaxesWhile the problems discussed above suggest that the cost of alleviat-ing Atlantic City's growing pains will be substantial, the income side ofthe ledger suggests substantial benefits. First, there are the 33,000 directindustry jobs that have been created in Atlantic City in the first eightcasinos. This does not include jobs created in industries indirectly relatedto casinos. Also, there are more than 13 million visitors, some of whomspend additional dollars outside the casino-hotel complexes. Secondly,substantial income is generated from property tax assessments. 27  Thisincome, however, presents a double-edged sword. On the one hand, theincome from property taxes enables the city and the county to fund thecost of growth. On the other hand, those same property taxes create ahardship for homeowners who neither want to sell their property nor earnwages sufficient to pay the higher taxes. Only the sellers benefit. Wherehomeowners cannot pay the tax and do not wish to sell, the economics willcause a "forced" sale. 28 Prior to casino gambling, Atlantic City attractedmany elderly individuals, living on social security and other low fixedincomes. Rising property taxes may have a catastrophic impact on thissegment of the population.25 id.26 See Atlantic City Dep't of Finance, The Financial Bonanza (1981) wherein Michael Matthews,Atlantic City Commissioner of Finance, notes a reduction of $15.3 million in state aid to the city,including $2.8 million in luxury taxes, $4.6 million in school aid, $1.5 million in direct state aid, anda $6.4 million increase in county assessments.27 Data obtained from Atlantic City Tax Assessor's Office."I Atlantic City's budget reserve for uncollected taxes rose from $2,444,255.34 in 1975 to$2,965,534.58 in 1978 and to $11,961,651.03 in 1981. The 1981 figure represents a tax delinquencyrate of 17 % of property taxes assessed and nearly 30 % of local taxes for municipal purposes excludingthe reserve. The local tax for municipal purposes for 1981 was $51,384,281.10, including the reserve.Compare City of Atlantic City, Local Municipal Budget 1981 with its budgets for 1975 and 1978.19821SETON HALL LEGISLA TIVE JOURNALE. Municipal Property Tax RateWhile the effective tax rates in Atlantic County demonstrate no cleartrend of increases or decreases from 1974 to 1978, the effective propertytax rates have declined in all the municipalities of Atlantic County since1978.29 Accompanying this marked decline, however, has been a rapidincrease in property values. For example, in Atlantic City's casino zonethere are properties whose tax rates have been cut by nearly 50% whiletheir values have increased by 500% .30  The result has been an overallincrease of 250% in property taxes. The inability of property owners topay their increased taxes is so great a problem that the city has carried verysubstantial budget reserves from year to year for uncollected propertytaxes. 3' Recently, however, the city has made a concerted effort to collectunpaid back taxes.32Not only have property values increased in Atlantic City, but theyalso have increased in Atlantic County in those developed areas close toAtlantic City. 33 In the four years from 1976 to 1979, property values inAtlantic City increased 50% from $2 billion to $3 billion.3 4 It is difficultto say exactly how much of this growth is attributable to casino gamingsince the State Pinelands Management Program has effectively eliminatedabout 80% of Atlantic County from further housing development.In addition to the receipts from property taxes, the Atlantic CityLuxury Tax has grown substantially to an all-time high since the develop-ment of casinos.35F. UnemploymentDespite the rapid increase in jobs in the Atlantic County area, unem-ployment among long-term residents remained high until recently. InNovember of 1974, the Governor appointed a Task Force on Unemploy-ment in Atlantic City. In June 1980, the Task Force issued its report,stating that in spite of the creation of 13,000 new jobs, local unemploy-"' Compare DISION OF TAxATION, NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF THE TREASURY, ANNUAL REPORT1978 at 27 with the Annual Reports of 1979 and 1980.30 NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DIVISIONOF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES at 18 (1980).31 See City of Atlantic City, Local Municipal Budget for the years 1975 through 1981.32 Discussion between William G. Ferry, Atlantic City Tax Assessor, and the author (September1981).33 See note 29 supra.I See note 29 supra.35 DIVISION OF TAXATION, NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF THE TREASURY, ANNUAL REPORT 1980 at 8.[Vol. 6:85ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMment stood at 13%, far exceeding the state average of 6.9% .36 Further-more, the Commission found conflicting governmental policies, a lack ofcoordination, and the absence of a clear public policy at the state level,especially from the Governor's office.37G. Retail Industy GrowthRetail industry growth has largely reflected the phenomenon charac-teristic of the nation's older central cities and their suburbs. While Atlan-tic City business has been declining rapidly over the last twenty years,substantial growth has taken place in the Atlantic County suburbs.3 8With the housing increases in the Atlantic County suburbs has come anincrease in retail business establishments. Suburban shopping centers havecropped up and now account for most of the retail sales in the area.39Since the arrival of casino gambling, retail sales in the county havegrown dramatically; 40 yet in Atlantic City, the number of retail establish-ments has declined by nearly 400, according to the president of theAtlantic City Merchants Association. Recently, however, many new retailestablishments have opened along Atlantic Avenue, the main shoppingthoroughfare. Clothing stores and restaurants seem to predominate. A1978 survey under the sponsorship of the Atlantic City Merchants Associa-tion found that retail sales for the remaining establishments in Atlantic3' See generally Governor's Task Force on Unemployment in Atlantic City, Report, June 1980 at1, 28-44.11 The task force recommended that: (1) the NewJersey Employment Service should be designatedas the Career Information Center for the greater Atlantic City area; (2) a comprehensive data collectionsystem should be established by the state to analyze and monitor the impact of casino gambling on thegreater Atlantic County area; (3) artificial barriers to employment such as those presently found in thecasino-hotel employee licensing process should be eliminated; (4) a division of affirmative actionshould be established within the Casino Control Commission to monitor the affirmative actionprovisions of the Casino Control Act; (5) the governor should issue a policy statement defining thestate's level of commitment of resources and services to the orderly development of the greater AtlanticCity area; (6) a regional development commission should be established to coordinate the economic,social, and environmental development of the greater Atlantic County area; (7) the casino-hotelindustry should commit itself to participation in and contribution to the social and economicdevelopment of the greater Atlantic City area, and (8) the casino-hotel industry should grant hiringpreference to qualified residents of Atlantic City. Id.See generally P. Raphel, The Impact of Casino Gambling on Atlantic City's CBD (May 25,1979) (unpublished Masters Thesis for the University of Pennsylvania).39 Id.40 Atlantic County Division of Economic Development, Growth Trends Report at 3 (SecondQuarter 1981).19821SETON HALL LEGISLATIVE JOURNALCity had increased substantially. 41 The findings indicated that 72% ofthe stores increased their business during the summer of 1978 and 76% ofthe stores increased their business in the fall of 1978.42 Substantial gainswere seen in women's apparel, men's apparel, shoes, jewelry, furniture,home furnishings, and general merchandise services.4"H. Land SpeculationOne of the more troublesome and far reaching features of rapidgrowth is land speculation. In Atlantic City, it started as early as 1973when casino gambling was first suggested for the resort. Sporadic landspeculation also took place prior to the November 1976 ballot whichapproved casino gambling. Since the opening of Resorts International inMay 1978 and the announcement of the gross wins44 which demonstratedthat casino gambling was spectacularly successful, land speculation hascontinued almost unabated.45Unfortunately, public policy has been stymied by the perplexingproblem of attempting to curb land speculation while at the same timenot harming long-time Atlantic City residents.Almost every effort to help the citizens of Atlantic City retain theirland has unwittingly assisted land speculators. For instance, the cut in theproperty tax rate has reduced the speculators' cost of holding the landuntil it is ripe for reselling.Unscrupulous speculators have not been deterred by the rent stabili-zation law in Atlantic City. When it became economically impractical torent, previously sound properties mysteriously burned. Where rentalhousing once stood, parking lots now dot the city landscape in a haphaz-ard pattern.Since 1976, the city's arson and fire prevention bureaus have listedhundreds of fires as suspicious. 46 The number has even exceeded theusual rash of fires that come in Atlantic City at the end of the summertourist season when the owners can no longer afford to hold on until thenext season.41 See generally Atlantic City Merchants Association, The Revitalization of the Central BusinessDistrict (1978).42 Id.43 Id.44 A "win" is the gross amount of money taken in the casinos before expenses are deducted.41 Discussion between William G. Ferry, Atlantic City Tax Assessor, and the author (September1981).41 Memo from B.C. Conover, Atlantic City Fire Dep't, to Chief of the Dep't (November 26,1981).[Vol. 6:85ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMA host of governmental policies have inadvertently raised propertyvalues in Atlantic City. For example, the New Jersey Pinelands Preserva-tion Plan removed from development reconsideration much of the landsurrounding Atlantic City. 47 Also, casino development regulations re-quiring a minimum of 500 rooms 48 for a casino-hotel have barred theconversion of many existing smaller hotels to casinos, thereby encouragingspeculation on the location of new construction sites. Additionally, theAtlantic City Zoning Board has granted variances permitting buildingoutside the casino zone, thereby fueling a frenzied pursuit of potentialwindfall land profits.The result of this land speculation is that many modest homes inAtlantic City sit on land that far exceeds the value of the house. If theowners are prepared to sell, potential profits can assure a reasonablycomfortable retirement. But if the individual wishes to continue living inAtlantic City, a nightmare looms.The casino industry has steadfastly disassociated itself from this par-ticular problem. On the other hand, Resorts International has continuedto purchase substantial blocks of land and is now the largest private landowner in Atlantic City.49The industry may be missing the result of the land speculation. Highland values and a tight housing market result in high housing costs andhigh land development costs. Ultimately, these high costs necessitatehigher salaries as employees attempt to maneuver in this expensive hous-ing market. Additionally, support-service industry employees also needhigher wages to survive in this market. Because of their land speculation,casino owners are creating a situation in which they will be forced to paytheir own employees higher salaries and, at the same time, pay for theescalating cost of goods and services from the support-service industry.There have been suggestions for addressing the land speculationdilemma. A land transfer tax has been proposed, but no action wastaken.50  Also, the Neighborhood Technical Assistance Corporation of47 See generally I NEW JERSEY PINELANDS COMM'N, NEW JERSEY PINELANDS: DRAFT COMPREHEN-SIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN (June 1980).41 NJ. STAT. ANN. § 5:12-83(d) (West Supp. 1981-1982).11 Discussion between William G. Ferry, Atlantic City Tax Assessor, and the author (February1981).so Discussions regarding a land transfer tax have occurred. Letter from Bradley Scott Brewster, NewJersey Legislative Drafting Service, to Steven Perskie, N.J. State Senator (March 23, 1979). SenatorPerskie has subsequently been quoted as saying that this tax "won't work." The Press, May 7. 1980.19821SETON HALL LEGISLA TIVE JOURNAL [Vol. 6:85Atlantic City issued a report which discussed land speculation extensivelyand offered recommendations to deal with the speculation problem.5'While a land transfer tax will not, by itself, be the complete answer, it canbe an important part of a comprehensive plan including: effective prop-erty assessment, tax collection, hardship relief, housing development,housing code enforcement, and a land banking program. Movement toresolve this difficult problem has been slow.51 Neighborhood Technical Assistance Corporation, Report, Fall 1980. The report was the productof Rutgers University, Livingston College, Department of Urban Planning, Central City ProblemStudio. The report made the following recommendations:Property Tax Reform1. Passage of the Matthew's Bill will enable the local tax assessor to assess homes in thecasino zone at the value that they were assessed at prior to casino gambling. The lawwould require owners to have resided in the home three years prior to its taking effectand to use the home as their primary residence.2. Differential tax assessments on residential property would enable the local assessor toassess property according to its use value rather than its market value. This measure hasa precedent in the New Jersey Farmland Assessment Act of 1964 (Chapter 48 Laws ofNew Jersey).3. Exemption from property tax increases in excess of 10% per annum for the elderly.4. Capital gains taxes on the transfer of property which is graduated according to thelength of time that the property has been held. Similar laws have been used by theStates of Vermont and the District of Columbia to curb speculation on residential andunimproved property.5. Homestead rebates to residential owners who have suffered more than a doubling ofproperty taxes during any two year period. Property tax relief could also be given topotential housing developers because there is currently little incentive to build middleincome housing in Atlantic City.The Two Percent Reinvestment Clause Requirement of the Casino Control Act. Thisregulation is not serving the housing or employment needs of Atlantic City residents as itwas intended. Funds to date have been set aside by casinos to build luxury condominiumsand apartments, hotels, and restaurants. The purpose of the two percent reinvestment ofcasino earnings to address the needs of Atlantic City and its residents should be mademore explicit in the language of the Casino Act.Enforcement of the Mt. Laurel Decision in Atlantic County. The taxes in neighboringsuburbs are not rising nearly as rapidly as in Atlantic City. However, due to what appearsto be exclusionary zoning in some of those towns, low income residents are unable to findhousing. Therefore, Atlantic City residents forced out of both their town and their countyare unable to enjoy the benefits of increased employment opportunities resulting fromthe growth of the casino industry.Strict Adherence to the Atlantic City Master Plan. The Casino Control Commissionshould honor the spirit of the Master Plan and deny casino operating permits to casinoswhich have chosen to build outside of the casino zones, andControl the Growth of New Casino Development. Regulate new casino construction toallow municipal infrastructure to catch up with casino growth. This policy can beimplemented by the Casino Control Commission.Id. at 85-86.ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMI. Economic Base DiversificationThe Department of Community Affairs' report on the impact ofcasino gambling predicted that the local economy would become moredependent upon casinos as time passed. 52  This has proved true. Becauseof land speculation and the resulting high cost of housing, it is becomingincreasingly impossible for non-casino employment to survive in the area.The one-dimensional economy of a casino city is not peculiar toAtlantic City. The 1975 Las Vegas General Plan of the City of Las Vegas,Nevada, indicated that there was a continuing struggle to create a morebalanced, and therefore more stable, economy.5 3J. Conclusion: Fiscal ImpactAt first, it would seem that both the costs and benefits of casinogambling in the Atlantic City area are substantial. However, it is too soonto say whether the benefits are worth the cost. In the short term, the costsseem to be outpacing the benefits by a substantial margin.Of course, these costs are not borne by the same individuals who reapthe benefits. The elderly, the poor, and those unable to help themselvesare bearing the greatest burden.5 4 The developers of casinos, 55 the ownersof land and real estate,5 6 the State treasury,57 and those able to competesuccessfully for casino industry jobs are realizing the biggest gains.As in any burgeoning industry, the development of casino gamblingin Atlantic City requires substantial front-end investment, not only by thecasinos but also by the state, county, and local governments. While muchhas been made of the substantial growth in Atlantic City, that growth isexacting hardships, some of which could have been avoided or lessened bysound corporate planning and balanced fiscal and land use planning bythe government. It is never too late to offer assistance. However, contin-52 NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, REVIEW OF THE PROBABLE IMPACT OF ATLANTICCITY CASINO DEVELOPMENT at 3 (January 1980).53 See generally City of Las Vegas, Nevada, Dep't of Community Development, Las VegasGeneral Plan: A Statement of Policy and Guidelines (February 5, 1975). The Las Vegas plan alsoindicated an attempt to alleviate problems very similar to those presently being faced in Atlantic City.Id.S See generally NEW JERSEY DEP'T OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, REVIEW OF THE PROBABLE IMPACTOF ATLANTIC CITY CASINO DEVELOPMENT (January 1980).55 NEW JERSEY CASINO CONTROL COMM'N, ANNUAL REPORT at 8-9 (June 30, 1980).-6 Data obtained from Atlantic City Tax Assessor's Office.57 NEW JERSEY CASINO CONTROL COMM'N, ANNUAL REPORT at 9 (June 30, 1980).1982]SETON HALL LEGISLA TIVEJOURNALued delay will inflict needless suffering on the residents and visitors anderode whatever competitive edge Atlantic City has over future casino hostlocations.Overregulation in the Context of the Atlantic CityCasino Gaming IndustryMirroring the national clamor against governmental regulations, thecasino industry has blamed the low profitability of the Atlantic Citycasinos on overregulation.58  The cry for fewer regulations suggests thatwithout the regulations, the industry would be profitable and that theCasino Control Commission is responsible for falling profits."9 To testthis contention the author reviewed the financial statements for all of thecasinos since May 1978 when Resorts International first opened.A review of financial documents does not confirm the charge thatoverregulation depresses profitability. Between 1978 and 1979 total reve-nue growth for the casino industry increased by 151%, rising from $134million to $336 million.60 However, at the same time, the number ofcasinos grew from one to three. Between 1979 and 1980, casino grossrevenues grew from $336 million to $643 million, an increase of 91%.However, at the same time, the number of casinos grew from three to six.Therefore, the lowered gross revenue for each casino is attributable to thenumber of casinos in the market, each trying to take advantage of theprofitability of the industry.In addition, growth in gross revenues was consistently strong insubsequent years. 1 Worthy of note is the indication that each succeedingyear's lowest gross revenues were still higher than the previous year'shighest gross revenues. This suggests a substantial and strong pace in grosscasino revenues.62A look at the casino win by square footage also suggests that factorsother than regulation are responsible for small operating profit mar-gins. 63 For example, Resorts International was the leader in casino win on11 The Star-Ledger, March 3, 1981, at 23.59 Id.60 NEW JERSEY CASINO CONTROL COMM'N, ANNUAL REPORT (June 30, 1980); NEW JERSEYCASINO CONTROL COMM'N, ANNUAL REPORT (June 30, 1979); E.F. HUTTON, (June 1981); dataobtained from Atlantic City Tax Assessor's Office.," Id. New Jersey Casino Control Comm'n, Press Release (August 11, 1981).62 Id.63 E.F. HUTTON, (July 1981); data obtained from N.J. Casino Control Comm'n.[Vol. 6:85ECONOMIC RECOVER Y PROGRAMa square foot basis in 1979.64 In 1980, Caesars Boardwalk Regencyrecorded an $11.35 gross win per square foot whereas Resorts, with a largercasino floor, recorded a $9.44 casino win by square footage..6  And in1981, it was projected that both Caesars Boardwalk Regency and GoldenNugget would surpass Resorts in this square footage category. This wouldcause a concomitant loss in Resorts International's market share. Resortshad 100% of the market in 1978 because it was the only casino; its marketshare was down to 33% in 1980 when there were six casinos. 66  Thatmarket share for the first six months of 1981 dropped to 19% as additionalcasinos entered the market.6 7A casino hotel is required by the Casino Control Act to have aminimum of 500 rooms.68  One casino has 725 rooms.6 9  Additionalhotel rooms and entertainment facilities will qualify a casino for additionalgaming space,70 thereby providing the casinos with an incentive to includethe additional facilities. However, these additional rooms also raise operat-ing costs and it is up to the individual casinos to determine whether theadditional casino floorspace is an overall benefit. In another category,uncollectible patron checks range from a low of $240,000 at Harrah's upto $4,321,507 at Caesars.71Briefly, overregulation does not seem to explain the discrepancies inthe performances of the various casinos 72 in the following areas: (1) in1979-marketing, energy costs, interest expenses and long-term debt,current maturities of long-term debt, total costs and expenses, stock issueincreases, deferred credit increases, patron check receivables for gamblingcredit extended, prepaid expenses, and room occupancy;7 3 (2) in 1980-room occupancy, casino costs, food and beverage costs, executive office4 Id.65 Id.0 Id.07 NEW JERSEY CASINO CONTROL COMM'N, ANNUAL REPORT (June 30, 1980); NEW JERSEYCASINO CONTROL COMMI'N, ANNUAL REPORT (June 30, 1979); E.F. HUTTON, (June 1981); dataobtained from Atlantic City Tax Assessor's Office.08 N.J. STAT. ANN. § 5:12-83(d) (West Supp. 1981-1982)." Resorts International.70 N.J. STAT. ANN. § 5:12-83(d) (West Supp. 1981-1982).71 See note 67 supra.72 See generally Annual Reports of Casinos reporting for the years 1979 and 1980 and their Firstand Second Quarters' Reports for 1981 to the NewJersey Casino Control Commission. The Reports aremandated by NJ. ADMIN. CODE tit. 19 § 45-5(a) (1981), which was adopted pursuant to N.J. STAT.ANN. § 5:12-70(n) (West Supp. 1981-1982).73 Id.19821SETON HALL LEGISLA TIVE JOURNALcosts, accounting and auditing, discretionary security, administrative andgeneral costs and interest expenses;"4 and (3) in 1981-rentals and otherincome, accounting and auditing, marketing, guest entertainment, andinterest expenses.15Students of management should be relieved to find that the oldmaxim still holds: good management breeds good results. The charge ofoverregulation appears to be a smokescreen for poor performance. Areview of the financial statements seems to support former CommissionerAlbert Merck's statement that the poor showing of Atlantic City's casinoindustry stems from poor financial planning and the industry's failure toadjust to the Atlantic City market.76Gaming Business magazine interviewed Clifford Jones, a casino oper-ator, attorney, and former Lieutenant-Governor of Nevada who is consid-ered to have a thorough knowledge of the gaming industry. When askedwhy casinos fail, Jones stated:[blad management makes them fail, and if they fail early, it's alack of initial capital. It's just that people get in a situation wheretheir overhead is greater than their income, where they don'thave initial capital to get through the first year or so, or wherethere is too much competition. . . . When they have 20 casinos(in Atlantic City), they will still be making money, but each willnot make as much money as they are making now. 77While many industry officials acknowledge the reality of competition andits reduction of the market share, some of the Atlantic City operators ortheir spokespersons have a different economic perspective.It is easy to blame the Casino Control Commission for the casinos'poor management and to make the Commission responsible for increasedprofitability through altered regulation of the various games. However,business foresight would seem to suggest that the industry should concen-trate its efforts on better management. That nine casinos would not be asprofitable as one (Resorts International) seems almost predictable. Nowthat competition has arrived, incompetence will not be disguised byreceipts growth. Management talent will make the difference.Not only must the management of each casino address its ownproblems but the casinos collectively must assist government in solving the74 Id.75 Id7' The Press, January 29, 1981, at 18.77 An Insider Looks at the World of Casino Gambling, GAMING BUSINESS MAGAZINE, January1981, at 44.[Vol. 6:85ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMlocal land use management problems that ultimately affect the industry'sbottom line. The limited land area of Atlantic City, the lack of parking,the unavailability of modern infrastructure, as well as the new businessenvironment-each has an impact on profitability. The casinos that willmake money are those casinos that one brokerage house research staff hascalled "sensibly-priced facilit[ies]" 78 That recent investment house anal-ysis identified the extremely high debt services as a major problem inAtlantic City casinos. 79Casino industry officials have suggested that the high debt of theAtlantic City casinos is somehow the responsibility of the city or theCasino Control Commission. 80  However, one must remember that thecasinos were the ones who came into the city with their deep pockets,showering money all over the town, buying properties without regard toprice. Cost overruns on facilities have been enormous. 81 Facilities esti-mated to cost less than $100 million subsequently have been projected atmore than $200 million. Ramada's Tropicana, once projected to cost $130million, has recently been projected at $330 million.82Major expense categories, controlled by management, contribute todeclining profitability. The cost environment in Atlantic City should soberthose casino builders who, seeing money as being "no object," rush inand spend as if there were no tomorrow. Only the land speculators andwilling sellers seem to have benefitted from this situation.Additionally, a recent study by the Casino Control Commissionrevealed that most casino hotel workers in Atlantic City earn higher wages,some as much as 34% higher, 83 than their counterparts in private indus-try. Rather than training individuals or assisting the city in developing aplan to train individuals, the newer casinos simply offer salaries higherthan those being offered in existing casinos. Casino employees then leaveexisting facilities and move on to higher wages in the new facilities. Someindividuals have moved two and three times, each time receiving a sub-" E.F. HUTTON.79 Id.10 The Star-Ledger, March 3, 1981, at 23.8I As a percent of revenues in 1980, interest expense ranged from Bally's $36,000,000 (17.4%) toGolden Nugget's $675,000 (11.6%), NEW JERSEY CASINO CONTROL COMM'N, ANNUAL REPORT(June 30, 1980); NEW JERSEY CASINO CONTROL COMM'N, ANNUAL REPORT (June 30, 1979); E.F.HUTrON (June 1981); data obtained from Atlantic City Tax Assessor's Office.11 The Wall Street Journal, August 17, 1981, at 17. The Star-Ledger, August 19, 1981, at 1I.83 See generally DIVISION OF FINANCIAL EVALUATION AND CONTROL, NEW JERSEY CASINOCONTROL COMM'N, SALARY STUDY OF TABLE GAME EMPLOYEES IN ATLANTIC CITY (August 1981).19821SETON HALL LEGISLATIVE JOURNALstantial increase in pay . 4 As a result, the casino industry is pushing up itsown costs. Thus, it seems that the casinos have chosen to pay higher wagesrather than develop programs to effectively manage their costs.Moreover, the industry is also pushing up the wage costs of non-casino businesses and government who must raise salaries to compete withthe industry, thus unleashing a secondary cost spiral. This price-war men-tality was also seen in marketing strategies where casinos were bidding forbus patrons during the 1980 winter months.Regulation does limit profit. However, responsible regulation pro-tects the public interest from short-sighted, short-term profit maximiza-tion.The casino industry was not brought to New Jersey to enrich a fewgambling house owners. Redevelopment was the goal and that goal hasnot been seriously addressed by the casino industry.The Future of Casino Gambling as an Economic Recovery ProgramThe future of casino gambling as an economic recovery tool outside ofNew Jersey is bleak until there are improvements in New Jersey's munici-pal and state fiscal cost benefit ratios. New York Governor Hugh Careysummed up the feelings of many state officials when, during the 1981National Governor's conference in Atlantic City, he stated "[wihat turnedme off? Well, the City wasn't improving, the City wasn't getting thebenefit of what's going on there." 85  It appears, therefore, to be in thecasino industry's self-interest to move more quickly to solve Atlantic City'sfiscal, social, and political problems.However, without reconstruction, reinforcement, and improvementof the roads and sewer system, the strained physical infrastructure ofAtlantic City cannot long resist a breakdown under the strain of playinghost to a projected 18 million visitors. No improvement can reasonably beexpected in the low overnight trip average unless the city offers moreforms of entertainment and is perceived as a pleasant place to visit.All of these concerns affect the bottom line. Profitability is likely toimprove if attention is given to all areas of need rather than to the currentsimplistic focus on the regulatory climate. Special winter events, improvedmarketing, and operational efficiency can turn unexploited resources intoprofits.84 Id.1s The Press, August 22, 1981, at 3.[Vol. 6:85ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMToday's sophisticated vacationer and traveller should be sold a totalentertainment package. The focus should be on the total casino complex,not just the casino floor; the total industry, not just one casino; and thecity, not merely the industry.The future of Atlantic City's profitability looks positive in light ofslowing inflation rates, moderate energy price increases, and smallerhouseholds with more discretionary income. The casino industry can rea-sonably be expected to capture a share of these additional dollars.ConclusionThe Casino Control Commission must now feel confident that theindustry is firmly established. Individual casinos may still see hard times.Some may be sold, but industry viability in Atlantic City seems assured.The Commission must, of course, focus on the industry welfare, not thewelfare of a particular firm. Those firms which make bad decisions mustface the economic marketplace.The long-term viability of Atlantic City as a casino gambling locationmust be assured by the Casino Control Commission. The rational behaviorof firms is necessarily profit maximization and limited risk through accel-erated investment recovery.The regulatory posture must shift to give balanced attention to thecompeting demands of the industry and Atlantic City's non-casino rede-velopment. The transportation, housing, environmental pollution,health, social, and fiscal needs of the city's people must be addressed witha strategy and timetable.Atlantic City will not realize maximum economic benefits if manyworkers continue to commute. Such commuting drains dollars that mightbe spent in the Atlantic City area. At the same time, the city has to pay forservices provided to the commuting employee. The sought after counter-cyclical business patterns will be even more elusive if local retail businessgrowth is not realized. Inter-municipal and inter-county tensions willgrow. Casino-hotel employees will tire of commuting and be unhappywith their physical surroundings. Productivity will, of course, suffer.Redevelopment is not just a frill. It is a necessary component ofprofitability. A hospitality industry should offer an escape from the drearyside of life. The total physical environment should contribute to this goal.The Casino Control Commission is now focusing more closely onAtlantic City's physical and social distress. If the industry is sincerelyinterested in avoiding regulatory control, they should focus as muchenergy on solving Atlantic City's physical and social problems as they have19821104 SETON HALL LEGISLATIVEJOURNAL [Vol. 6:85on casino-hotel development. Unless some substantial assistance is forth-coming, the regulatory approach may be required.Experience to date in Atlantic City suggests mixed results for therecovery program. Some people have benefitted, others have not. Thephysical redevelopment has been slow, but probably slower than neces-sary. Personality and political conflicts have taken their toll. But, a cooper-ative spirit among the local leadership (between elections) seems to beemerging as familiarity with the industry increases and early growth im-balances moderate.The potential for a new Atlantic City still exists but unless substantialcreative energy and sincere effort come from many of the participants,including the casino industry, mention of Atlantic City may once againprompt the request that "the last one out should 'turn out the lights.' "