Through Local Wisdom: A Policy Road for Bali's Post Pandemic Economic Recovery

ICoGPASSThe 4th International Conference on Governance, Public Administration, and SocialScienceVolume 2023Research ArticleThrough Local Wisdom: A Policy Road forBali's Post Pandemic Economic RecoveryRisky Yustiani Posumah, Retnayu Prasetyanti, and Rindri Andewi GatiNIPA-School of Administration, JakartaORCIDRisky Yustiani Posumah. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8509-5656Retnayu Presetyanti. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8070-4539Rindri Andewi Gati. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2315-6350Abstract.As a tourist area where most of its income comes from the tourism sector, Bali is theworst hit area as a result of Covid-19 pandemic. Mobilization restrictions eliminatetourists who come to Bali, both domestic and foreign. Bali’s economy declineddrastically, and its government inevitably tried to adapt through leading sectors otherthan tourism. Economic strengthening is then carried out through a number of policiesthat prioritize local wisdom in managing regionally superior products in various sectors,especially in the local industrial sector and the creative economy. Endek’s traditionalfabric industry is considered the ‘savior’ of Bali’s economy in the pandemic era. Thosewho lost their jobs in the tourism sector turned into craftsmen or marketers of Endekproducts. This research analyzes the efforts of Balinese Government in revitalizingthe economy after Covid-19 pandemic. This research uses a qualitative approach withdescriptive data obtained from statements, written words, and observed behavior. Thedata used consist of primary and secondary data obtained through research in thefield. The result of the study shows that Bali’s economic recovery policy by highlightingEndek cloth is in line with the Bali Government’s vision. Through “Nanung Sat KerthiLoka Bali” all policies should maintain the sanctity and harmony of Bali’s nature. Thevision focuses on three main aspects, namely nature, manners, and culture, whichimplement the value of Tri Hita Karana (three causes of prosperity). It consists of sixpillars of leading sectors targeting the industrial sector, SME sector, the creative anddigital economy sector and also the tourism sector. The Balinese Government has alsosucceeded in creating an ecosystem that supports the Endek fabric industry. Bali isexpected to be economically independent by utilizing its local potential. This is shownby the policy on the use of traditional cloth and the IKM Bali Bangkit Expo, whichwas held this year. The recommendation offered is the implementation of prioritydevelopment programs carried out by the Balinese Government based on the conceptof custom-based on local wisdom, tradition, and cultural arts. In addition, there is aneed for further policy strengthening by involving the Bali Provincial Government,Dekranasda Bali, relevant ministries, the private sector, and Endek actors/craftsmen.Keywords: Local wisdom, Endek, economy recovery, economy policy, sustainablecommunitiesHow to cite this article: Risky Yustiani Posumah, Retnayu Prasetyanti, and Rindri Andewi Gati, (2023), “Through Local Wisdom: A Policy Road forBali’s Post Pandemic Economic Recovery ” in The 4th International Conference on Governance, Public Administration, and Social Science, KnE LifeSciences, pages 632–642. DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578Page 632Corresponding Author: RiskyYustiani Posumah; email:risky.yustiani@gmail.comPublished 21 June 2023Publishing services provided byKnowledge ERisky Yustiani Posumah etal. This article is distributedunder the terms of the CreativeCommons Attribution License,which permits unrestricted useand redistribution provided thatthe original author and sourceare credited.Selection and Peer-review underthe responsibility of theICoGPASS ConferenceCommittee.ICoGPASS1. INTRODUCTIONBali is one of the areas that depend on the tourism sector for its income. The covid-19 pandemic has eliminated most of the region’s income. Both the local governmentand the community are very dependent on the benefits brought by both local andinternational tourists. The covid pandemic that started at the end of 2019 made Balitourism sector decline, tourists stopped arriving, travel and guide services became quiet,hotels were closed due to the impact of the policy of limiting mobilization. Although thesituation has gradually improved, it does not necessarily improve the economic situationin Bali, which must endure a long two-year pandemic from 2020-2022. This situationforced the government to innovate and change to restore the situation and restorethe economic condition of Bali. Through Dekranasda Bali, the government, assistedby relevant stakeholders, is trying to restore economic stability in stages, starting fromempowering the community with economic activities using the concept of local wisdomthat is easier to apply by the local community. In accordance with the vision of theProvince of Bali “Nanung Sat Kerthi Loka Bali” means maintaining the sanctity andharmony of Bali’s nature. The vision focuses on three main aspects, nature, manners,and culture which align in the value of Tri Hita Karana (Three Causes of Prosperity).Starting from this local vision and values, the Balinese government builds an ecosys-tem that supports local industries. One of the industries that the government needs toguard and align with this concept is the Endek fabric industry. Balinese Endek WovenFabrics/ Balinese Traditional Woven Fabrics is the original Balinese woven fabric. Tosupport this, the Bali provincial government made a policy of using traditional fabrics inconjunction with the establishment of the IKM Bali Bangkit which was initiated by theBali Dekranasda together with relevant ministries, the private sector and Endek fabriccraftsmen. It is also supported by a number of policies issued by the Bali provincialgovernment, including the Bali Provincial Regulation No. 4 of 2020 concerning theStrengthening and Advancement of Balinese Culture, Bali Governor Regulation Number79 of 2018 concerning the Day of Using Balinese traditional Clothing, Bali GovernorRegulation Number 99 2018 concerning the Marketing and Utilization of Balinese Agri-cultural, Fishery, and Local Industrial Products, and the Circular Letter of the Governor ofBali Number 4 of 2021 concerning the Use of Balinese Endek Woven Fabrics/ BalineseTraditional Woven Fabrics.DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 633ICoGPASS2. THEORY2.1. Local WisdomThere are several understandings of local wisdom, including mentioning that localwisdom is the cement that binds in the form of an existing culture so that it is basedon existence. Local wisdom is a culture created by local actors through an iterativeprocess, through internalization of religious and cultural teaching that are socialized inthe form of norms and used as guidelines in everyday life for the community (Ratna,2011). There are also those who argue that local wisdom is a view of life and knowledgeas well as various life strategies in the form of activities carried out by local communitiesin answering various problems in meeting their needs. In a foreign language, it is oftenconceptualized as a local policy of local wisdom or “local knowledge” or genius (Fajarini,2014). The values in local wisdom always survive because these values grow and arepresent together with cultural value that are applied in everyday life so that the valuesof local wisdom can be very attached and have meaning in social life.Local wisdom is the identity or cultural personality of a nation that causes the nationto be able to absorb, even process 31 cultures originating from outside/other nationsinto their own character and abilities (Wibowo, 2015). Therefore, it is not uncommonfor the values contained in local wisdom to be adopted into culture and even laws orregulations that apply in some areas, the fusion of local wisdom values in culture andlocal regulations is a manifestation of the inherent cultural values in people’s daily lives.Local wisdom sourced from cultured and maintained by local communities has variousforms. Unayah and Sabarisman (2016) explain several forms of local wisdom that existin the community.The principal of local wisdom in society, the value of local wisdom also has severalprinciples (Prastowo and Budiana, 2016), namely:1. The principle of responsibility is that this responsibility is not only individual butalso collective2. Respect for nature is respect and maintaining its sustainability3. The principle of solidarity is a feeling of sharing with nature and with other livingthings4. The principle of love and care is not based on personal interest but solely fornatureDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 634ICoGPASS5. The principle of not harming or damaging is because humans have a moralobligation to nature6. The principle of simple life and in harmony with nature, namely the consumptionand production patterns of modern humans must be limited.7. The principle of justice is equal access for all groups and community members indetermining policies for natural resource management and nature conservation,and in participating in enjoying the benefits8. The principle of democracy is joint policy making in determining the good or bad,whether or not a natural resource is damaged. The principle of moral integrity,this principle demands to have moral attitudes and behaviour to secure the publicinterest.Local wisdom can take the form of tangible (textual, architectural, traditional artwork)and intangible (value system, songs, advice), and in terms of local wisdom it consists ofgovernance, value systems, procedures, and special provisions such as sensitive areasand areas/sacred buildings. In the Province of Bali, the local wisdom that is appliedis the concept of “Nanung Sat Kerthi Loka Bali” which means maintaining the sanctityand harmony of Bali’s nature, where the concept focuses on three main aspects, namelynature, manners, and culture which is rich in the value of Tri Hita Karana (Three Causesof Welfare). In line with the concept promoted by the provincial government of Bali in itsefforts to improve economic conditions after the Covid-19 pandemic, the governmentcertainly cannot make it happen alone but with the support of various parties includingthe private sector, academics, and of course the community who are also businessactors.2.2. Stakeholder TheoryIn the industrial context, stakeholders have an important role and power in control-ling resources in industrial operational activities. Therefore the company/industry mustmaintain relationships with stakeholders by accommodating existing wants and needs,especially stakeholders who have power over the availability of resources used forthe operational activities of the company/industry, such as workers, customers andowners (Chariri & Ghozali, 2007). Stakeholders theory interprets organizations as partof a complex socio-economic community, not entities that only operate for their owninterest, but must provide benefits to stakeholders. Stakeholders in this case includecreditors, suppliers, shareholders, consumers, the public, the government and otherDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 635ICoGPASSinterested parties. Stakeholder theory is a strategic management concept that canhelp companies/industry strengthen relationships with external parties and developcompetitive advantage. In this study, stakeholders theory becomes one of the analyticaltools to identify the types of stakeholders, relationship, roles and influences of each.The stakeholders mapping in this study was carried out in an integrated manner withthe helix model analysis. Stakeholders theory is also the basis for determining eachother and their contribution in economic, social, and environmental aspects.The triple helix relies on 3 main stakeholders, namely the government, industry andacademia (universities) (Widjajani, Fajarwati, Hidayat, & Haryadi, 2018). Each stakeholderhas a complementary role, the government carries out its role and function as a policymaker that has the authority and power in policy formulation, regulation (law), andfinancial resources. Industry plays a role as a provider of needs, owners of innovationproduction machines, technology, skilled labor as well as financial resources. Finally,academics, in this case universities, are also known as pro-public innovators (Sulaksono,2018) acting as centers for the development of research-based science and information.More complex than the triple helix and quadruple helix, there are additional stake-holders in the quintuple helix pioneered by Carayannis & Campbell. The quintuple helixcompletes the quadruple helix by adding a fifth helix, which is the natural environment.This last helix has natural capital as an innovation driver. In addition to government,industry, universities, and civil society, the natural environment has an important role inthe innovation and knowledge production process to realize sustainable development.In the perspective of Carayanis et al (2012). The natural environment contributes tomaintaining the balance between the helix and ensuring the internalization of sustain-ability principles in industry/development. The quintuple helix drives improvements toknowledge structures and innovations; emphasizes the socio-ecological transitions thatsocieties and economic sectors require in the 21𝑠𝑡 century. Therefore, the quintuple helixcan be said to be very sensitive ecologically (Praswati, 2017).3. RESEARCH METHODThis study uses a qualitative research approach with descriptive methods trough lit-erature study and secondary data collection. In general, this scientific paper providesa descriptive or description of the economic recovery in the province of Bali after thecovid-19 pandemic. The selection of research methods and approaches is based onthe type of data used and the research objectives, namely to analyze, interpret, andpresent data and information (Ahmadi & Narbuko, 2004). This research uses a caseDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 636ICoGPASSstudy approach which was chosen because the research is casuistic in nature. Theauthor makes in-depth observations about the economic recovery of Bali Provincewhich is carried out with the concept of local wisdom. Particularly for primary dataobtained, the writer conducted in-depth interviews with key informants and participantsobservation.Interviews were conducted with the government, in this case Dekranasda Bali, in col-laboration with the private sector and community representatives who produce Endekwoven fabrics. Primary data was obtained through direct interviews with key informants,secondary data was obtained through literature study and related primary data, resultsof previous research, and regulatory documents related to sustainable development,sustainable communities, local wisdom, economic recovery and economic policy. Thelocation was chosen on the grounds that Bali Province is a tourism area that experiencedan economic downturn due to restrictions on the number of tourists due to covid-19pandemic during 2020-2022.4. RESULTSThe Regional National Crafts Council or Dekranasda is a non-profit organization estab-lished with the aim of covering and developing handicraft product businesses and tryingto improve the lives of its business people. It consists of various groups of Small andMedium Enterprises (UKM) and government sectors. Dekranasda was formed based ona joint decree of 6 Ministers namely the Minister of Industry, Minister of Trade, Ministerof Home Affairs, Minister of Culture and Tourism, Minister of Cooperative and SME, andMinister of State Enterprises. There are several objectives and functions of Dekranasda,namely:1. Exploring, developing and preserving the nation’s cultural heritage as well asfostering the discovery and use of new technology to improve quality in orderto strengthen the nation’s cultural identity.2. Instilling public awareness of the importance of arts and crafts for the daily life ofIndonesian citizens that can increase human dignity.3. Paying attention and fighting for the interest of craftsmen and enthusiasts byencouraging their entrepreneurial spirit.4. Assist the government in formulating policies in the handicraft industry and pro-gram the quality of human resources.DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 637ICoGPASS5. Expand the market share of handicraftsOne of Dekrnasda’s goals is to empower local SME, not only opening opportunitiesfor local industries to grow bigger but also encouraging and helping to expand marketaccess for local industries to reach global markets. To make this happen, Dekranasdacreated a cooperation program for SME and the local digital e-commerce, BaliMall.id.The Bali Bangkit program is carried out throughout the year that also holds the BaliDesignpreneur Fashion Show where the clothes on display are not only intended forexhibitionmodels but can still be used in general. The Bali Designpreneur Fashion Showwas also attended by various talented designers from Bali. In addition to introducinglocal Balinese woven/fabric products (Tenun Endek), it also opens opportunities forwork and innovations from craftsmen who work together with talented young localdesigners. The Bali Bangkit program, which is carried out by Dekranasda Bali Province,also directly helps the artist and SMEs owners to understand business management,both financial management, product distribution and other important matters related torunning a business so that SMEs owners have a good knowledge about business andcan always develop and maintain the business.The Bali Government’s effort to internalize the “Nanung Sat Kerthi Loka Bali” aredescribed in six main pillars of leading sectors which target the industrial sector, UMKMsector, the creative and digital economy sector as well as the tourism sector. There areat least 4 stakeholders/helix who are part of the creative industry including government,private/business, community/media, academics and the natural environment helix. Thefirst helix/stakeholder is the joint of local governments in Bali such as district/citygovernment and regional national craft council (Dekranasda). This helix has the author-ity/resources in the form of political capital. The second helix is the industry, such assmall and medium enterprises, Local Development Bank (BPD), and digital platform BaliMall with economic and technology capital resources. The third helix/stakeholders areacademics who have human capital resources. The fourth helix is IKM and UMKM withsocial capital resources, and the last helix/stakeholder is the natural environment withnatural capital resources. In general, the description of stakeholder identification canbe described trough helix innovation as shown below.4.1. Local wisdom-based policiesThe direction of policies and programs of the Bali Provincial government is carriedout based on the vision of “Nanung Sat Kerthi Loka Bali” which means maintainingthe sanctity and harmony of Bali’s nature and its contents. This is in accordance withDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 638ICoGPASS  Figure 1Bung Karno’s Trisakti principles, namely political sovereignty, economic independence,and cultural personality. The vision is intended to lead to the Bali Era Baru where theroadmap of Bali’s development is concentrated on three main aspects, nature, mannersand culture which are rich in the value of Tri Hita Karana (Three Causes of Prosperity).The derivative of this vision is in line with the economic principles named Bali Kerthilaunched by Presiden Joko Widodo. Bali Kerthi means maintaining and making the bestuse of Bali’s potential to the fullest for the benefit of the Balinese people. This principleconsists of six pillars of the leading sector, (1) agricultural sector (organic), (2) marine andfishery sector, (3) industrial sector, (4) small and medium enterprise (SME) sectors, (5)creative and digital economy sector and (6) the tourism sector.Bali is an area that experienced a downturn when the covid-19 pandemic hit. Thetourism sector has largely shut down due to restrictions on mobilization and restrictionon visitors coming from abroad. Domestic and foreign tourists visiting Bali have experi-enced a drastic decline, the tourism sector used to be Bali’s highest potential. Restrictionon activities causes the economy to stop, that’s when a lot of adaptation takes places inBali’s leading sectors so that they can survive. The Bali Bangkit Exhibition was initiatedby the chairman of the Bali Provincial Dekranasda, Mrs. Putri Koster since mid-2020.The Bali Bangkit exhibition is a synergy of the Provincial Dekranasda, Regency/CityDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 639ICoGPASSDekranasda and BPD Bali and Balimall.id. The purpose of holding this exhibition is oneof the efforts to preserve ancestral cultural heritage. Most of the SME that joined werefrom the fabric, craft, and gold and silver jewelry craftsmen. The Bali Bangkit exhibitionis divided into 4 periods and takes place throughout the year with around 70 tenantsparticipating in each period. The location of this exhibition is at the Bali ProvincialCultural Park Art Center. The average sales at the exhibition were IDR 1.8 billion/monthor IDR 2.9 billion a year and went straight into the craftsmen.Tenants who joined this exhibition were curated for their craft products before joining.In 1 stage of the exhibition, each tenant will get a capacity building program consistingof guidelines to set the prices, how to market products, making reports, managingmoney in and out, and managing the business as a whole. All tenants who join areexpected to be able to run a sustainable business after joining this exhibition. Tenantswho joined this exhibition marketed Balinese products, such as Gringsing, Endek, andother craft material with Balinese identical patterns. This is an appeal from the Governorof Bali, Wayan Koster, so that all regional organizations and the Balinese peoplemaintaintheir ancestral heritage, especially traditional Balinese fabrics/ Balinese Endek wovenfabrics. Balinese Endek have experienced a period of being produced outside Bali andbrought back to Bali for sale. This makes Bali lose a lot of things. Bali has lost its culturalheritage and is only enjoyed by business actors. Then there was improvement andrearrangement in the fabric and craft industry.Endek is the cultural identity of the Balinese people and is commonly used in theinterest of custom and religious rituals. This cloth is produced using Non-MachineWeaving Tools (Alat Tenun Bukan Mesin/ATBM) which are done in their own homesand have been developing since the early 20th century. Endek craftsmen in Bali aregenerally still based in villages and people’s homes. Endek craftsmen are experiencingchallenges when dealing with digitalization and the new era due to the pandemic.However, support from Dekranasda and the Bali Provincial Government of Bali havebeen able to manage and support the Endek cloth industry until now. Among the manyforeign tourists visiting Bali, the Provincial Government of Bali and its subordinates’ effortto maintain local cultural values should be highly appreciated. This is also inseparablefrom the role of traditional stakeholders (such as Pecalang) who participate in remindingtheir people to stick to tradition and preserve their ancestral cultural heritage. Anotherfollow-up effort was the issuance of regulations in the form of Governor of Bali RegulationNumber 79 of 2018 concerning Days for the use of 46 Balinese Traditional clothing,governor of Bali Regulation Number 99 of 2018 concerning marketing and utilization ofBalai agricultural, fishery and local industry products, as well as Bali Governor circularDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 640ICoGPASSletter Number 4 of 2021 concerning the use of Balinese Endek Woven Fabrics/Balinesepeople wearing Endek or traditional woven fabrics to go to the office every tuesday. Thisis a form of internalization so that the Balinese people have a sense of belonging so thatthe Balinese people have a sense of belonging so that cultural values are maintained.Balinese Endek came under the spotlight when the fashion house, Christian Diorincluded Bali’s Endek fabric in its Spring/Summer 2021 collection at Paris Fashion Week.The process of using Endek cloth for the Dior collection does not run in one step. Severalvirtual meetings took place between Dior accompanied by the Dekranasda and the BaliProvincial Government is very consistent in maintaining the use of Endek becauseit is a cultural and ancestral heritage that has been passed down from generationto generation so its use and selection of pattern cannot be arbitrary. The patternproposed by Dior must be curated carefully at first so it can be used in accordancewith the traditional norms and standard. The design and the use of cloth for Dior’sfashion products using Endek is also conditioned so that it does not conflict withBalinese customs. There are approximately 3 kinds of Endek pattern used by Diorin the collection.5. CONCLUSIONSGovernor of Bali has carried out some efforts to strengthen sustainable fashion in Balithrough several policy innovations, namely, (1) Governor of Bali Regulation Number79 of 2018 concerning Days of Wearing Balinese Traditional Clothing, (2) Governorof Bali Regulation Number 99 of 2018 concerning Marketing and Utilization BalineseAgricultural, Fishery and Local Industrial Products, and (3) Bali Governor Letter Number4 of 2021 concerning the Use of Balinese Endek/Balinese Traditional Woven Fabrics.The Governor of Bali appealed to leaders of vertical agencies, leaders of higher edu-cation institutions, regents/mayors, heads of regional apparatuses, heads of state andlocal owned enterprise (BUMN and BUMD), heads of private companies, and heads oforganizations/community institutions throughout Bali, to always respect and appreciateBalinese Endek/Balinese Traditional Woven Fabrics as a creative cultural heritage ofthe Balinese people. The stipulations for Balinese Endek/Balinese Traditional WovenFabrics used are those which are Balinese handicrafts and are based on local Balineseculture. This is done to support the continuity/sustainability of local Balinese fashion,Balinese Endek/Balinese Traditional Woven Fabrics.DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 641ICoGPASSReferences[1] Achmadi, Narbuko. Metode Penelitian. Jakarta: Bumi Aksara; 2004.[2] Carayannis EG, Barth TD, Campbell DF. TheQuintuple Helix innovationmodel: globalwarming as a challenge and driver for innovation. J Innov Entrep. 2012;1(1):2.[3] Carayannis E, Grigoroudis E. Quadruple innovation Helix and smart specialization:knowledge production and national competitiveness. Foresight and STI Governance.2016;10(1):31–42.[4] Chariri A, Ghozali I. Teori Akuntansi. Semarang: Badan Penerbit UniversitasDiponegoro; 2007.[5] Fajarini U. Peranan Kearifan Lokal DalamPendidikan Karakter. Jurnal Sosio Didaktika.. 2014;1(2). https://doi.org/10.15408/sd.v1i2.1225.[6] Ari Agung P, Heru Ryanto B. Pengembangan Pola Komunikasi Pariwisata BerbasisKearifan Lokal. Jurnal l Ilmu Komunikasi. 2016;7(1).[7] Praswati AN. Perkembangan Model Helix dalam Peningkatan Inovasi.Prosiding Seminar Nasional Riset Manajemen & Bisnis 2017 “PerkembanganKonsep Dan Riset E-Business Di Indonesia; 2017. 690–705. Retrieved fromhttps://publikasiilmiah.ums.ac.id/bitstream/handle/11617/9022/sansetmab2017_15.p~df?sequence=1&isAllowed=yRatna, Nyoman Kutha. 2011. Antropologi SastraPeran Unsur-unsur Kebudayaan dalam Proses Kreatif. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Belajar[8] Sulaksono H. Roadblock Implementasi Peran Quadruple Helix Dalam UpayaMeningkatkan Kapabilitas Inovasi Dan Keunggulan Bersaing (Studi Pada IndustriSapi Perah Berbasis Kearifan Lokal Di Kabupaten Jember). 2018: Prosiding SeminarNasional Manajemen dan Bisnis III (SNMB3). 2018.[9] Wibowo, Agus, Gunawan. Pendidikan Karakter Berbasis Kearifan Lokal di Seko-lah.Yogyakarta: Penerbit Pustaka Belajar. 2015.[10] Widjajani W, Fajarwati A, Hidayat A, Haryadi D. Quadruple Helix InnovationModel for Rural Development: The Case of Sukaraja Tourist Village in Indonesia.SOSIOHUMANITAS. 2018;20(2):1–10.DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i11.13578 Page 642