Is Green Recovery Enough? Analysing the Impacts of Post-COVID-19 Economic Packages

energiesArticleIs Green Recovery Enough? Analysing the Impacts ofPost-COVID-19 Economic PackagesPedro R. R. Rochedo 1 , Panagiotis Fragkos 2 , Rafael Garaffa 1,3, Lilia Caiado Couto 4, LuizBernardo Baptista 1,* , Bruno S. L. Cunha 1 , Roberto Schaeffer 1 and Alexandre Szklo 1Citation: Rochedo, P.R.R.; Fragkos,P.; Garaffa, R.; Couto, L.C.; Baptista,L.B.; Cunha, B.S.L.; Schaeffer, R.;Szklo, A. Is Green Recovery Enough?Analysing the Impacts ofPost-COVID-19 Economic Packages.Energies 2021, 14, 5567. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14175567Academic Editor: Luigi AldieriReceived: 25 July 2021Accepted: 1 September 2021Published: 6 September 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional affil-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1 Centre for Energy and Environmental Economics (Cenergia), Energy Planning Programme (PPE), COPPE,Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil-Centro de Tecnologia, Sala I-034, Cidade Universitária,Rio de Janeiro 21941-972, Brazil; pedrorochedo@ppe.ufrj.br (P.R.R.R.); rafael.garaffa@ec.europa.eu (R.G.);slcunha.bruno@ppe.ufrj.br (B.S.L.C.); roberto@ppe.ufrj.br (R.S.); szklo@ppe.ufrj.br (A.S.)2 E3 Modelling, 70-72 Panormou Street, PO 11523 Athens, Greece; fragkos@e3modelling.com3 European Commission, Joint Research Centre-JRC, 3-41092 Seville, Spain4 The Bartlett School of Environment, Energy and Resources, University College London, Central House,14 Upper Woburn Place, London WC1H 0NN, UK; lilia.couto@ucl.ac.uk* Correspondence: luizbernardo@ppe.ufrj.brAbstract: Emissions pathways after COVID-19 will be shaped by how governments’ economicresponses translate into infrastructure expansion, energy use, investment planning and societalchanges. As a response to the COVID-19 crisis, most governments worldwide launched recoverypackages aiming to boost their economies, support employment and enhance their competitiveness.Climate action is pledged to be embedded in most of these packages, but with sharp differencesacross countries. This paper provides novel evidence on the energy system and greenhouse gas(GHG) emissions implications of post-COVID-19 recovery packages by assessing the gap betweenpledged recovery packages and the actual investment needs of the energy transition to reach the ParisAgreement goals. Using two well-established Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) and analysingvarious scenarios combining recovery packages and climate policies, we conclude that currentlyplanned recovery from COVID-19 is not enough to enhance societal responses to climate urgencyand that it should be significantly upscaled and prolonged to ensure compatibility with the ParisAgreement goals.Keywords: COVID-19; economic recovery; stimulus packages; climate scenarios; integrated assess-ment modelling1. IntroductionThe impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on climate change mitigation will ultimatelydepend on long-term trajectory shifts caused by economic recovery [1]. The emissionreduction rate observed during the restrictive confinement period in the first half of 2020 isbroadly comparable to the annual emission reduction rate needed to achieve the 1.5 ◦Ctarget [2]. However, the sharp 7% drop in emissions experienced during 2020 is likely toreflect only the very short term, not causing any lasting effect since the previous fossilfuel-based infrastructure is still in place and could rapidly return to full capacity [3,4].IEA [5] has predicted a major surge in CO2 emissions from the energy sector in 2021, as theworld rebounds from the pandemic via accelerating rollouts of COVID-19 vaccinations inseveral countries and extensive fiscal responses to the economic crisis. Emissions pathwaysafter COVID-19 will be shaped by how economic responses translate into infrastructureexpansion, energy use, investment planning and societal changes.The urgency to curb greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions and attain the Paris Agreementtemperature goals is now at risk of being overlooked by the need for an economic responseto the COVID-19 pandemic crisis. The economy-wide recession has led to a steep decreaseEnergies 2021, 14, 5567. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14175567 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energiesEnergies 2021, 14, 5567 2 of 18in oil and gas prices and a widely agreed need for governments to intervene with substantialeconomic stimulus [6], which could propel or undermine the energy transition, dependingon future investment profiles [7].Arguably, both the climate crisis and the pandemic-related crisis should be tackled atonce through a low-carbon economic response, by ensuring that large funding is directed toclean energy [1]. As a response to the COVID-19 crisis, most governments worldwide havelaunched recovery packages aiming to boost their economies, support employment andenhance their competitiveness [8]. Climate action is embedded in most of these packages,but with sharp differences at regional level.The European Union has launched a EUR 750 billion recovery package, from whichat least 30% of expenditure is committed to mainstreaming climate action [9]. The UnitedStates Biden administration, similarly, has launched a “Build Back Better plan” which aims atcanalising USD two trillion into low-carbon investment, including USD 400 billion directly toclean energy over the next ten years [10]. In contrast, an economic recovery based on low oilprices, such as the stimulus announced by Indonesia, Turkey and Russia [11], and investmentin traditional infrastructure would hinder progress towards limiting global temperature riseand would increase the risk of locking our economies into a high-emission trajectory.Climate change research addresses long-term impacts of current and mid-term decision-making through modelling to respond to “what if” questions. It assesses the long-termimpacts of policies and societal changes over emissions and consequent temperaturechanges. Scenarios play a key role as long-term research tools for the transition to a low-carbon world. The analysis of common scenarios using multiple modelling frameworksallows the research community to produce integrated and comparable analyses of climatechange impacts, adaptation and mitigation [12,13]. Providing shared scenarios is crucial topromoting interactions among disciplines and research interests, in order to make conclu-sions compatible and consistent across the literature, thus allowing easier communicationof modelling results, as well as reducing scattered individual efforts towards elaboratingconsistent assumptions for their own scenarios [13].While the scenario framework used by the Intergovernmental Panel on ClimateChange (IPCC) and other authors [12,14–18] still serves as the basis for future narrativesand mitigation pathways, COVID-19 raises a substantial policy shift, which impacts miti-gation in the long-run, as it changes the core socio-economic assumptions underpinningthese scenarios, the investment planning in various countries and (potentially) consumerbehaviour (e.g., through reduced air transport and increased home working). The climateresearch community will therefore have to update scenarios reflecting such trade-offs inorder to analyse future pathways from the COVID-19 pandemic onwards and inform policydebate on appropriate ways of allocating recovery funds.This paper draws on the existing IPCC scenario framework [14,15] to advance the fieldby including potential long-term impacts of policy responses to what is plausibly believedto be the harshest societal crisis of the century: the COVID-19 pandemic. We providenovel evidence on the energy system and emission implications of post-COVID-19 recoverypackages by revealing the wide gap between pledged recovery packages and the actualinvestment needs of the energy transition. We test the hypothesis that currently plannedrecovery from COVID-19 will undermine the response to climate urgency by modellingpost-COVID-19 scenarios until 2050 through two different modelling frameworks: theCOFFEE-TEA and the PROMETHEUS IAMs [19].2. Materials and MethodsThe following sections describe the modelling frameworks and the scenarios designedfor this study, together with our analyses on current recovery packages.2.1. Modelling FrameworksThis study uses two different modelling frameworks to assess the impacts of greenrecovery packages. The COFFEE-TEA IAM suite of models [20] comprehends a bottom-up,Energies 2021, 14, 5567 3 of 18partial equilibrium, global model for the energy and land systems (COFFEEComputableFramework for Energy and the Environment) soft-linked to a global Computable GeneralEquilibrium (CGE) model; the Total Economy Assessment (TEA) model. COFFEE rep-resents the optimal pathway for the interaction and uptake of technologies and energysources to meet a given demand for energy services, by minimising the total cost of thesystem from pre-established policy restrictions (Rochedo, 2016). The model captures theevolution of sectors such as energy, industrial processes, AFOLU, waste and others andtheir respective GHG emissions until 2100, including a detailed representation of energyresources, extraction and conversion technologies for each region, both in terms of volumeand costs. TEA is a multi-regional and multi-sectoral model that represents the productionand trade of goods, capturing industry-to-industry linkages, in the global economy [21].TEA follows the standard microeconomic optimisation framework, assuming total marketclearance and perfect competition. The TEA model provides consistent macroeconomicpathways, projecting future economic activities’ demands to COFFEE, while COFFEEimproves the representation of energy markets in TEA, given their compatibility in termsof base year data, sectoral and regional disaggregation.PROMETHEUS is a comprehensive energy system model focusing on technology uptakeanalysis, energy price projections, and assessment of climate policies [22,23]. It captures theinteractions between energy demand and supply at regional and global level and providesdetailed projections of fuel mix in energy consumption, electricity production mix by tech-nology, carbon emissions, energy prices and investment to the future. PROMETHEUS canprovide medium and long term energy system projections up to 2050, in both the demandand the supply sides, under different policy and technology scenarios.Most importantly, the modelling frameworks can be used for the impact assess-ment of energy and environment policies at regional and global levels, including pricesignals, such as carbon or energy taxation, subsidies, technology and energy efficiencypromoting policies, Renewable Energy Systems (RES) supporting policies, and technol-ogy standards [22,24]. The modelling frameworks are therefore designed to address thequestions about the short-, medium- and long-term effects of post-COVID-19 economicrecovery based on long-term scenarios for global GHG emissions, capturing the extent towhich pledged recovery packages manage to avoid carbon lock-in given key assumptionsthat drive investment in the energy system (e.g., oil prices, cost of technologies, efficiency,lifespan). For detailed information about the modelling frameworks, see Appendix A.2.2. Scenario Design: COVID-19 Economic Recovery Packages Screening and ModellingWe depart from a baseline (CurPol) scenario framed within the Shared SocioeconomicPathway—SSP2 “middle of the road” [25] rationale, but applying short-term regionalGDP growth shocks due to COVID-19. We use short-term projections of the COVID-19pandemic impact from the International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook updatedin October 2020 [26] and the OECD Economic Outlook of December 2020 [27]. The CurPolscenario does not comprise any additional economic recovery policy or climate policy apartfrom the policy framework currently in place, which is described in detail in [28]. From2025 onwards, the SSP2 GDP growth rates are applied.In order to design scenarios reflecting policies launched as a response to the COVID-19economic crisis, we screened policy packages announced up to May 2021 for investment inthree main technology groups related to low-carbon transition: Power generation, EnergyEfficiency and Transport. For this purpose, we assessed government plans and tools createdspecifically to analyse the greenness and brownness of post-COVID-19 stimulus, namely:the Green Recovery Plan Tracker [29], the Energy Policy Tracker [11], the Climate ActionTracker [30] and the Greenness Stimulus Index [31]. When regional trend data are needed,the IEA Country Statistics [30] are used.Markedly, the European Union and the United Kingdom led in terms of launchinggreen recovery plans still in 2020. The Next Generation EU Recovery Plan, consistentwith the European Green Deal, commits at least 30% of its EUR 750 billion budget toEnergies 2021, 14, 5567 4 of 18climate action, while the remaining 70% should follow the principle to “do no harm” tothe environment (European Council Conclusions, 17–21 July 2020—Consilium, n.d.). Atthe same time, countries such as France and Germany, as well as the UK, outperformin the greenness of their stimulus packages, with a net positive impact towards climateaction [31]. Additionally, the Energy Policy Tracker traced no commitment to direct fossilfuel support from the European Commission, in contrast with a USD 385.36 commitmentto clean energy investment [11].China still faces major uncertainties regarding the emission profile of its economicrecovery plans. While China has announced a target for net zero carbon emissions by 2060,and committed additional USD 22 billion to clean energy investment when compared tofossil fuel energy [11], it still plans to install as many new GW of coal power plants as itsprevious trajectory [31].The US has notably the largest economic stimulus package in the world. In the earlystages of the pandemic, the US administration pledged USD 2.98 trillion of public expen-diture, which included environmental measures for the power, industry, manufacturingand transport sectors, involving, for example, penalty exemptions. The US overall energyinvestment commitment originally included USD 72.35 billion to oil, oil products andcoal, and USD 27.27 billion to support clean energy, mostly directed to biofuels and windpower [11]. A clear shift took place when, in 2021, the Biden administration committed to“Make a historic investment in clean energy and innovation”, pledging an additional USD400 billion to renewable energy investment [10]Economies that heavily rely on fossil fuel exploitation such as Russia and MiddleEastern countries unsurprisingly indicate a fully brown recovery [11,31]. The remainingworld regions seem to show rather dubious stimulus profiles, with investment directedboth ways, but mostly showing brown net impacts [32,33].Having screened national and regional policy packages for the post-COVID-19 pan-demic economic responses, we translate them into assumptions for each of the scenariosand their main policy instruments (Table 1). The Recovery Packages scenario (RecPac)assumes the implementation of plans for investments on a portfolio of green energy op-tions in different countries, amounting USD 1 trillion over the 2020–2025 period. In bothIAMs, green recovery packages are implemented as investment subsidies to low-carbontechnologies, including solar PV, wind, electric vehicles, biofuels, heat pumps and effi-ciency measures. The implementation of subsidies incentivises the uptake of clean energytechnologies in power production, transport and buildings sectors.Given that economic recovery packages comprise broader sectoral coverage thansolely green energy and that investment in infrastructure requires longer maturity, wefurther assess the implications of a 5-fold increase in green energy investments as comparedto the RecPac scenario. We call it the Enhanced Recovery scenario (EnhRec), where the totalamount invested in green energy reaches approximately USD 5 trillion over the 2020–2025period, which is in line with the 3-year extension of the recovery packages found in [8].The scenario conceptualises a situation of prolonged needs for recovery packages, giventhat most countries face challenges to fight new COVID-19 variants, upscale vaccinationrates and boost their economies. It gives an indication of how much investment in greenenergy is required in order to support the energy transition.To assess the ambition gap of the recovery packages in previous scenarios we simulatea Climate Ambition scenario (CliAmb) that is based on a remaining carbon budget of 600GtCO2 over 2018–2100, considered compatible with a 1.5 ◦C average global warming by2100 without temperature overshoot [34]. In this scenario, we simulate an economy-wide,global carbon market, in the form of an emission trading system in TEA, with the resultingcarbon prices taken as input to COFFEE.Energies 2021, 14, 5567 5 of 18Table 1. Summary of policy scenarios.Scenario Tag Policy Instruments DescriptionBaseline CurPol Current policiesCurrent energy and climate policies.Short-term COVID-19 socio-economicimpacts are included, but recoverypackages are not.RecoveryPackages RecPacCurPol + Directinvestment,subsidiesRecovery packages implemented asinvestment in green energytechnologies reflecting nationalpolicies announced up to May 2021EnhancedRecovery EnhRecCurPol + Directinvestment,subsidiesGreen energy investments areincreased by 5 times as compared tothe RecPac scenario to cover the2021–2025 period.Climate Ambition CliAmb Carbon pricingLong-term pathways consistent with awell below 2 ◦C average globalwarming by 2100 based on a carbonbudget of 600 GtCO2 over 2018–2100without temperature overshoot.GlobalGovernance GloGovCurPol + Directinvestment,subsidiesTotal amount of recovery packagesannounced up to May 2021implemented as investment in greenenergy technologies globally(modelling framework optimalchoice).Finally, we also account for inter-regional disparities by simulating a Global Gover-nance scenario (GloGov) in which the total amount of green recovery funds is allocatedglobally (i.e., investments are not restricted to each region). We acknowledge the factthat a mechanism of global governance is extremely difficult to be implemented in thecontext of the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, the results of the GloGov scenario shouldbe interpreted as a hypothetical exercise, reflecting the global least-cost optimal solution ofthe modelling framework, given the green energy technological portfolio included in thetwo IAMs. The models therefore allocate the total sum of each pledged recovery packageto choose the optimal set of technologies and their locations.We translate the green recovery packages into variables and parameters to be simu-lated in the modelling framework. The recovery packages were inserted in the modellingtools by changing specific parameters depending on model formulation, in particular byimposing additional investment in low-carbon technologies exogenously or by insertingsubsidy rates in the capital costs to reduce the purchase price and accelerate the deploymentof mitigation options. We start by allocating the amount of packages to sectors followingthe allocation proposed by the IEA (2020) [7]. In particular:• 33% of the total amount goes to power generation, mostly in renewable energy tech-nologies (wind and solar) but also to grid enhancements to support the increaseduptake of variable renewable sources;• 30% of the total amount is directed to low-emission transport modes, mostly in thepurchase of electric cars;• 30% of the total amount goes to increase energy efficiency and electrification of build-ings; and• The remaining 7% is directed to increase energy efficiency in industrial sectors.After setting the sectoral allocation, we define what instruments are used in each sector.Here, our choice is somehow limited by the modelling framework—typically, bottom-upmodels with rich technological details—so we mainly explore supply-side instruments, notEnergies 2021, 14, 5567 6 of 18including demand-side instruments that could play a role in a green recovery context (e.g.,consumer behaviour, digital services, lifestyle changes).On the supply-side instruments, we therefore rely on direct investments for the ex-pansion of renewable energy, mostly to wind and solar PV, as well as to grid enhancementsto support the increased penetration of variable RES; subsidies on the purchase of electricvehicles and other zero-emission alternatives in the transport sector; and direct incentivesthrough reduced prices of efficient equipment purchases and subsidise costs to increaserenovation rates and accelerate the deployment of heat pumps and other low-emissionoptions in buildings.3. ResultsIn this section, we present the results of the different policy scenarios. The IAMsdepart from similar/comparable but different baselines (CurPol), and so the modellingresults should be interpreted in relative terms when comparing them across the modellingframeworks.3.1. Policy Scenarios (National Pledges)Figure 1 describes the global CO2 emissions pathway of each modelling frameworkby scenario from 2020 to 2050. In the RecPac scenario, COFFEE shows a small decreasein global emissions between 2020 and 2025, mostly reflecting short-term effects of theinvestment in green energy. In the absence of additional stimulus to green energy, thistrend is, however, reversed from 2025 onwards, with emissions returning to the originalpathway of the CurPol scenario and achieving 34.7 MtCO2 in 2050. The emissions trajectoryin PROMETHEUS presents similar behaviour as COFFEE in RecPac, particularly after 2025,with the model reaching 40.9 MtCO2 in 2050, showing a decline of 1–2 Gt annually fromCurPol over 2020–2050. PROMETHEUS shows a larger reduction in global emissions fromCurPol levels in the short-term (by 2025), induced by the implementation of green recoverymeasures as investment subsidies stimulating the increased uptake of renewable energy,electric vehicles, and energy efficiency.Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7  of  19    Figure 1. Global CO2 emissions pathway over 2010–2050. Figure 2 presents the ambition gap for different scenarios in 2030. The ambition gap accounts for the difference in global CO2 emissions between the policy scenarios (RecPac and EnhPac) and the more ambitious mitigation scenario compatible with the Paris Agree‐ment goal of 1.5 °C (CliAmb). The implementation of recovery packages results in limited emission reductions, thus closing only a small part of the emission gap from the 1.5 °C cost‐optimal pathway in 2030 (3–7% across models in the RecPac scenario). The Enhanced Recovery scenario leads to larger mitigation, closing 16–29% (across models) of the ambi‐tion gap in 2030. The impacts by 2050 are even smaller, with recovery packages representing about 1–7% of the overall effort towards the Paris Agreement goal of 1.5 °C. The impacts of green recovery packages vanish in the longer term, as in the absence of strong climate policy signals for investment in green energy and reducing fossil fuel use beyond 2025, emission pathways return to their CurPol trends with limited reductions until 2050.  0%5%10%15%20%25%30%COFF_RecPac COFF_EnhRec PROM_RecPac PROM_EnhRec%share of global CO2emissions reduction2030 2050Figure 1. Global CO2 emissions pathway over 2010–2050.In the EnhPac scenario, the additional investment in green energy leads to largermid-term effects in terms of emissions mitigation in both models—with global emissionsdeclining by 9.6–13.2% in 2025 and 6.2–15.3% in 2030 from Cur Pol levels. This shows thatthe prolongation of green recovery packages can support further emission reductions andpartly close the emissions gap with the cost-optimal pathway to 1.5 ◦C in 2030. However,Energies 2021, 14, 5567 7 of 18if not combined with ambitious climate policy, alone they are not sufficient to triggerstructural changes towards net zero by mid-century, with global emissions amounting to34.0–38.9 GtCO2 across models in 2050, which is clearly not compatible with the goal ofcarbon neutrality by 2050.Figure 2 presents the ambition gap for different scenarios in 2030. The ambitiongap accounts for the difference in global CO2 emissions between the policy scenarios(RecPac and EnhPac) and the more ambitious mitigation scenario compatible with the ParisAgreement goal of 1.5 ◦C (CliAmb). The implementation of recovery packages results inlimited emission reductions, thus closing only a small part of the emission gap from the1.5 ◦C cost-optimal pathway in 2030 (3–7% across models in the RecPac scenario). TheEnhanced Recovery scenario leads to larger mitigation, closing 16–29% (across models) ofthe ambition gap in 2030.Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7  of  19    Figure 1. Global CO2 emissions pathway over 2010–2050. Figure 2 presents the ambition gap for different scenarios in 2030. The ambition gap accounts for the difference in global CO2 emissions between the policy scenarios (RecPac and EnhPac) and the more ambitious mitigation scenario compatible with the Paris Agree‐ment goal of 1.5 °C (CliAmb). The implementation of recovery packages results in limited emission reductions, thus closing only a small part of the emission gap from the 1.5 °C cost‐optimal pathway in 2030 (3–7% across models in the RecPac scenario). The Enhanced Recovery scenario leads to larger mitigation, closing 16–29% (across models) of the ambi‐tion gap in 2030. The impacts by 2050 are even smaller, with recovery packages representing about 1–7% of the overall effort towards the Paris Agreement goal of 1.5 °C. The impacts of green recovery packages vanish in the longer term, as in the absence of strong climate policy signals for investment in green energy and reducing fossil fuel use beyond 2025, emission pathways return to their CurPol trends with limited reductions until 2050.  0%5%10%15%20%25%30%COFF_RecPac COFF_EnhRec PROM_RecPac PROM_EnhRec%share of global CO2emissions reduction2030 2050Figure 2. Closing the ambition gap—Share of global CO2 emissions reduction from CurPol levelsachieved in RecPac and EnhRec scenarios compared to reductions required to achieve the 1.5 degreetarget in a cost-optimal way in 2030 and 2050.The impacts by 2050 are even smaller, with recovery packages representing about1–7% of the overall effort towards the Paris Agreement goal of 1.5 ◦C. The impacts of greenrecovery packages vanish in the longer term, as in the absence of strong climate policysignals for investment in green energy and reducing fossil fuel use beyond 2025, emissionpathways return to their CurPol trends with limited reductions until 2050.Mitigation in policy scenarios comes as a consequence of changes in the energy system,triggered by the increased deployment of renewable energy, energy efficiency, low-carbonfuels and electrification of energy services [22]. Figure 3 presents the results of both modellingframeworks under alternative policy scenarios in 2030 and 2050 for: (a) final energy con-sumption; (b) changes in total energy use of the transport sector; (c) the share of renewablesin electricity generation; and (d) the global emission factor of electricity generation (CO2emissions per MWh produced). The bars in Figure 3 describe the results for the ambitiongap—i.e., the difference between CliAmb and CurPol scenarios—while the empty dot andthe filled dot represent the levels achieved in RecPac and EncRec scenarios, respectively.Energies 2021, 14, 5567 8 of 18Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8  of  19   Figure 2. Closing the ambition gap—Share of global CO2 emissions reduction from CurPol levels achieved in RecPac and EnhRec scenarios compared to reductions required to achieve the 1.5 degree target in a cost‐optimal way in 2030 and 2050. Mitigation in policy scenarios comes as a consequence of changes in the energy sys‐tem, triggered by the increased deployment of renewable energy, energy efficiency, low‐carbon fuels and electrification of energy services [22]. Figure 3 presents the results of both modelling frameworks under alternative policy scenarios in 2030 and 2050 for: (a) final energy consumption; (b) changes in total energy use of the transport sector; (c) the share of  renewables  in electricity generation; and  (d)  the global emission  factor of electricity generation (CO2 emissions per MWh produced). The bars in Figure 3 describe the results for the ambition gap—i.e., the difference between CliAmb and CurPol scenarios—while the empty dot and the filled dot represent the levels achieved in RecPac and EncRec sce‐narios, respectively.  Figure 3. Energy system transformation—decrease in final energy consumption (a); decrease in en‐ergy use of transport (b); share of renewables in electricity generation (c); and global emission factor of electricity generation (d) in 2030 and 2050. Figure 3a shows low to moderate changes in final energy consumption in RecPac and EnhPac scenarios  (−0.2%  to 10.6%). Final energy use  in COFFEE shows a more similar trajectory in these scenarios than in CliAmb, while PROMETHEUS presents a more sub‐stantial reduction in final energy consumption in the long‐term, particularly due to energy efficiency measures and to a more rapid electrification of the transport sector. As  illustrated  in Figure 3b, PROMETHEUS shows a reduction  in transport‐related energy consumption of nearly −33% in 2030, while the penetration of electric vehicles in COFFEE  is more moderate, which, combined with a greater use of biofuels,  leads  to a reduction of around −7% in 2030. Given the lack of long‐term climate policies to increase the uptake of low and zero‐emission vehicles, the projected reduction in energy consump‐tion in transport declines over time, ranging from −0.1% to −8.1% in 2050. Nonetheless,  results  suggest  that  the  green  recovery packages promote  a  greater transformation in the power sector, in particular due to a fast increase in wind and solar PV electricity generation. In both RecPac and EnhRec scenarios, the share of renewable energy in electricity production reaches substantial levels in 2030 (32–37% in RecPac and 38–44% in EnhPac), lying within the projected range of the CliAmb scenario. Although pushed by the green recovery packages, results confirm that the penetration of renewables Figure 3. Energy system tran formation—decrease in final en rgy consumption (a); decrease in en rgy use of transport (b);share of renewables in electricity generation (c); and global emission factor of electricity generation (d) in 2030 and 2050.Figure 3a shows low to moderate changes in final energy consumption in RecPacand EnhPac scena ios (−0.2% to 10.6%). Final energy use in COFFEE shows a moresimilar trajectory in these scenarios than liAmb, w ile PROMETHEUS presents a moresub ta tial reduction in final energy consumption in the long-term, particularly due toe ergy efficiency mea res and to a m re rapid electrific tion of the transport sector.As illustrated in F gur 3b, PROMETHEUS shows a reduction in transport-relatedenergy consumption of nearly −33% in 2030, wh le the pe etration of electric vehiclesin COFFEE is more moderate, whic , combined with a greater use of biofuels, leadsto a re uction of around −7% in 2030. Given th lack f long-term climate policies toincrease the uptake of low and zer -emission vehicles, the projected reduction in energyconsumption in transport declines over time, ranging from −0.1% to −8.1% in 2050.Nonetheless, results suggest that the green recovery packages promote a greatertransformation in the power sector, in particular due to a fast increase in wind and solar PVelectricity generation. In both RecPac and EnhRec scenarios, the share of renewable energyin electricity production reaches substantial levels in 2030 (32–37% in RecPac and 38–44% inEnhPac), lying within the projected range of the CliAmb scenario. Although pushed by thegreen recovery packages, results confirm that the penetration of renewables in electricitygeneration is not solely driven by the packages, and a greater share than in 2030 is reachedby mid-century driven by technology cost reduction and increased adoption of renewableenergy technologies (43–54% in RecPac and 47–57% in EnhRec).The transformation of the energy system can also be illustrated by the global emissionfactors of electricity generation (Figure 3d). Over 2030–2050, emission factors decrease froma range of 313–380 MtCO2/MWh to 185–287 MtCO2/MWh as a result of the decarboni-sation of the power system, showing substantial decrease as compared to 2015 (485–576MtCO2/MWh). However, although they are in the upper ranges of the CliAmb scenario,these levels are far from meeting the lower bounds in 2030 (52–64 MtCO2/MWh) or evenzeroing emissions in 2050 as required to meet the Paris Agreement goals of 1.5 ◦C.Closing the ambition gap comes at different costs across the modelling frameworks.Figure 4 presents the results for the green energy investment required to close the gap in2030 and 2050. In the horizontal axis, the investment gap is the level of cumulative invest-ment (present value (PV) in 2020 of the level of investment over 2020–2030, discounted at a5% p.y. rate) in policy scenarios compared to the level of the more ambitious mitigationscenario (CliAct). In the vertical axis, the emission gap is shown. In Figure 4, numbers forEnergies 2021, 14, 5567 9 of 18RecPac and EnhRec scenarios are summarised as COFFEE and PROMETHEUS Standard,while results for the GloGov scenario appear as COFFEE Global Optimal.Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9  of  19   in electricity generation is not solely driven by the packages, and a greater share than in 2030 is reached by mid‐century driven by technology cost reduction and increased adop‐tion of renewable energy technologies (43–54% in RecPac and 47–57% in EnhRec). The transformation of the energy system can also be illustrated by the global emis‐sion  factors of  electricity generation  (Figure 3d). Over 2030–2050,  emission  factors de‐crease from a range of 313–380 MtCO2/MWh to 185–287 MtCO2/MWh as a result of the decarbonisation of the power system, showing substantial decrease as compared to 2015 (485–576 MtCO2/MWh). However, although they are in the upper ranges of the CliAmb scenario, these levels are far from meeting the lower bounds in 2030 (52–64 MtCO2/MWh) or even zeroing emissions in 2050 as required to meet the Paris Agreement goals of 1.5 °C. Closing the ambition gap comes at different costs across the modelling frameworks. Figure 4 presents the results for the green energy investment required to close the gap in 2030 and 2050. In the horizontal axis, the investment gap is the level of cumulative invest‐ment (present value (PV) in 2020 of the level of investment over 2020–2030, discounted at a 5% p.y. rate) in policy scenarios compared to the level of the more ambitious mitigation scenario (CliAct). In the vertical axis, the emission gap is shown. In Figure 4, numbers for RecPac and EnhRec scenarios are summarised as COFFEE and PROMETHEUS Standard, while results for the GloGov scenario appear as COFFEE Global Optimal.  Figure 4. Ambition gap and investment gap in 2030 and 2050. Green recovery packages close a high fraction of the investment gap in 2030 (17–35% in RecPac and 79–116% in EnhRec), but a relatively smaller part of the emission gap (3–7% in RecPac and 16–29% in EnhRec). This result suggests that other policy instruments that incentivise changes not only in the investment patterns, but also in the use patterns Green recovery packages close a high fraction of the invest ent gap in 2030 (17–35in RecPac and 79–116% in EnhRec), but a relatively smaller part of the emission gap (3–7%in RecPac and 16–29% in EnhRec). This result suggests that other policy instruments thatincentivise changes not only in the investment patterns, but also in the use patterns ofenergy infrastructure, vehicles, appliances and equipment, are required to achieve greaterlevels of mitigation (e.g., carbon pricing that penalises the use of fossil fuels).We also note that, in the CliAmb scenario, carbon prices in the global emission tradingsystem rise from USD 29/tCO2 to USD 55/tCO2 over the 2025–2050 period, correspondingto a total revenue of USD 643 billion in 2025 and USD 1082 billion in 2050. The sim-ulation of a comprehensive carbon pricing instrument adds to our analysis of a greeneconomic recovery by providing a few insights. First, the total revenue of the carbon mar-ket serves as a proxy of what the figures at play are and how they compare to the amountof the green recovery packages announced. For instance, green recovery amounts to USD1 trillion, while our simulations suggest a global carbon market of USD 2.3 trillion over the2020–2025 period. Second, carbon pricing is widely regarded as a cost-effective instrumentby internalising the cost of the pollutants in the prices of goods and services, thereforereducing the costs of the climate policy. As illustrated in Figure 4, despite the substantialeffort in closing the investment gap, policy instruments included in the green recoverypackages are less efficient in terms of closing the ambition gap. Third, in CliAmb, a globalcarbon pricing is in place over the full period, highlighting the relevance of long-termEnergies 2021, 14, 5567 10 of 18signals to abate emissions, in contrast to the instruments included in the green recoverypackages that do not provide long-term signals and are discontinued after 2025.3.2. Global GovernanceDifferences across the RecPac/EncRec and GloGov results also reveal that going globalachieves a greater reduction in worldwide emissions than implementing national greenrecovery strategies independently. By simulating a hypothetical mechanism of globalgovernance (GloGov scenarios), results suggest a further reduction of 4–6 percentagepoints in global emissions relative to the scenarios where recovery packages are simulatedfollowing national pledges, meaning that a greater share of the emission gap is achievedwith the same amount of money invested, thus increasing the overall cost-efficiency ofrecovery packages. However, recovery packages announced up to May 2021 are highlyconcentrated in developed regions, particularly in Europe and North America. Investmentallocation by regions and sectors in the Global Governance scenario in 2030 is presentedin Figure 5. The modelling framework optimal choice leads to a different allocation ofrecovery funds as compared to the RecPac scenarios, both in terms of sectors and regionsof where investment is directed to.Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11  of  19    Figure 5. Investment allocation by regions and sectors in Global Governance scenario. Note: R5MAF (Middle East and Africa), R5OECD90 + EU (OECD countries), R5LAM (Latin America), R5REF (Rest of the World), R5ASIA (Asia). Most  interestingly,  the choice  is not  restricted  to  sectors, but also  includes  the  re‐gional dimension. The results suggest that the optimal allocation of investments would differ substantially from the  initial one where Europe and North America are protago‐nists; the  joint share of OECD economies declines from 80%  in the RecPack scenario to 31% in the GloGov case. In both scenarios (GloGov and GloGov + EnhRec), Asia stands as the strongest candidate to where investments should be directed to, given that the least‐cost abatement opportunities are placed within this region, resulting in a 35–55% share of total investment. Africa takes a greater share of investments as compared to RecPac sce‐nario, reaching up to 20% of the total investment, while other regions also emerge in the scenarios’ results (Latin America and Rest of the World) with lower shares. 4. Discussion Scenario results show that even an enhanced green recovery strategy would not be enough to close the emission or investment gap in order to shift the global emission path‐way consistently with the Paris Agreement temperature goals. A larger and fully green stimulus should be implemented; it is clear that a fossil‐based recovery would cause an unaffordable delay to climate action. The IEA [5] projects a sharp rebound in electricity demand of nearly 5%  in 2021 and 4% in 2022, with an  inevitable rebound in fossil‐fuel generation since renewable investments have been postponed by the pandemic. Despite low investment attractiveness and the stranded‐asset threat, countries may seek to accel‐erate fossil fuel production in the context of moderate crude oil prices. The critical post‐COVID‐19 situation in emerging countries may generate relatively predatory strategies based on mineral extraction and agricultural production  [33] with  long‐term  repercus‐sions on land use, fossil fuel use and GHG emissions. A fossil‐based post‐COVID‐19 re‐covery would create a carbon  lock‐in, which would delay climate compatible develop‐ment in those economies. Our model‐based analysis shows that recovery packages stimulating investment in clean energy and energy efficiency can reduce global emissions by 10–13% in 2025 and 6–15% in 2030 relative to the CurPol scenario. So, they can close less than 7% of the emission gap to Paris‐compatible pathways in 2030 [35] (and up to 30% if they are enhanced and prolonged for 5 years), but cannot induce the structural changes required to reach global net‐zero energy systems by 2050. Current green recovery packages are not enough to deal with climate urgency, but (if upscaled and combined with ambitious climate policies) they can potentially  catalyse  the  transition  to net‐zero energy emissions by mid‐century. A green recovery should therefore include considerably more ambitious climate policies. Figure 5. Investment allocation by regions and sectors in Global Governance scenario. Note: R5MAF (Middle East andAfrica), R5OECD90 + EU (OECD countries), R5LAM (Latin America), R5REF (Rest of the World), R5ASIA (Asia).Results indicate that a greater share of green investments would flow to renewables(60–70%) in GloGov and GloGov + EnhRec scenarios (GloGov + EnhRec scenario simulatesthe Global Governance scenario with the green energy investments being increased by5 times as compared to the amount of RecPac scenario to cover the 2021–2025 period),decreasing the amount directed to buildings and transport sectors. The optimal solutionof the modelling framework is chosen due to having the least-cost abatement opportu-nities, which are found in the renewable energy sector, especially as solar PV and windtechnologies are already cost competitive to fossil fuels in many parts of the world (IEA,2021) [7].Most interestingly, the choice is not restricted to sectors, but also includes the regionaldimension. The results suggest that the optimal allocation of investments would differsubstantially from the initial one where Europe and North America are protagonists; thejoint share of OECD economies declines from 80% in the RecPack scenario to 31% inthe GloGov case. In both scenarios (GloGov and GloGov + EnhRec), Asia stands as thestrongest candidate to where investments should be directed to, given that the least-costabatement opportunities are placed within this region, resulting in a 35–55% share of totalinvestment. Africa takes a greater share of investments as compared to RecPac scenario,reaching up to 20% of the total investment, while other regions also emerge in the scenarios’results (Latin America and Rest of the World) with lower shares.Energies 2021, 14, 5567 11 of 184. DiscussionScenario results show that even an enhanced green recovery strategy would notbe enough to close the emission or investment gap in order to shift the global emissionpathway consistently with the Paris Agreement temperature goals. A larger and fullygreen stimulus should be implemented; it is clear that a fossil-based recovery wouldcause an unaffordable delay to climate action. The IEA [5] projects a sharp rebound inelectricity demand of nearly 5% in 2021 and 4% in 2022, with an inevitable rebound infossil-fuel generation since renewable investments have been postponed by the pandemic.Despite low investment attractiveness and the stranded-asset threat, countries may seek toaccelerate fossil fuel production in the context of moderate crude oil prices. The critical post-COVID-19 situation in emerging countries may generate relatively predatory strategiesbased on mineral extraction and agricultural production [33] with long-term repercussionson land use, fossil fuel use and GHG emissions. A fossil-based post-COVID-19 recoverywould create a carbon lock-in, which would delay climate compatible development inthose economies.Our model-based analysis shows that recovery packages stimulating investment inclean energy and energy efficiency can reduce global emissions by 10–13% in 2025 and6–15% in 2030 relative to the CurPol scenario. So, they can close less than 7% of the emissiongap to Paris-compatible pathways in 2030 [35] (and up to 30% if they are enhanced andprolonged for 5 years), but cannot induce the structural changes required to reach globalnet-zero energy systems by 2050. Current green recovery packages are not enough to dealwith climate urgency, but (if upscaled and combined with ambitious climate policies) theycan potentially catalyse the transition to net-zero energy emissions by mid-century. A greenrecovery should therefore include considerably more ambitious climate policies.Interestingly, results have shown that green recovery packages provide more of aninvestment gap closure than an emission gap closure (Figure 4). In the enhanced recoverycase (EnhRec), in 2030, the resulting level of investment can meet or even exceed projectedrequirements (in the case of the PROMETHEUS model), while the emission gap closurecould reach a maximum of 29%. This could mean that chosen technologies need a largeupfront investment to reach a minimum scale, or that infrastructure should be put in placebeforehand. It can also mean that combined policies are necessary as demand drivers. Asproposed in the CliAmb scenario, a global carbon pricing mechanism, namely an ETS,should be effective as an incentive for such shifts.Combining green recovery packages (in the form of investment subsidies to low-carbon technologies) with carbon pricing schemes may drive the required medium andlong-term system transformations towards net zero by mid-century. Currently pledgedrecovery packages, if fully green, can propel the post-pandemic economic recovery “doingno harm” to climate ambition. Enhanced packages could probably accelerate economicrecovery, and be more successful in closing the emission gap. However, ultimately, combin-ing strengths of recovery packages with carbon pricing could accelerate the technologicaltransition while ensuring post-pandemic economic stimulus. Green recovery packageswould avoid redundancies through the creation of green jobs, while carbon pricing sustainsmitigation in the longer, necessary, time frame. Therefore, this combination could be asuccessful way of closing the gap between RecPac/EnhPac and CliAmb scenarios, not onlyuntil 2030, but also in the long run. On the one hand, mitigation achieved through greenrecovery packages can increase the social acceptance of climate policy by reducing theneed for high carbon pricing. On the other hand, the introduction of (mild) carbon pricingschemes can increase the effectiveness of green recovery packages in terms of emissionsreduction by penalising also the use of fossil fuels and not only investment decisions takenby energy consumers and producers.Overall, our model-based analysis shows that green recovery packages can accelerateenergy system transformation with higher uptake of renewable energy, electric vehiclesand energy efficiency until 2030, but cannot deliver the systemic long-term restructuringto pave the way towards carbon neutrality by 2050. Additionally, our analysis makesEnergies 2021, 14, 5567 12 of 18the case for a hypothetical mechanism of global governance for green stimulus packages.Institutionally challenging as it may be, global optimal allocation of recovery packagesyields a larger level of mitigation through larger shares of wind and PV power generation.It could also potentially lead to reducing inequalities, since resources would migrate fromEurope and North America to less developed regions, mostly Africa, Latin America andparts of Asia.5. ConclusionsInvestment choices for the post-pandemic recovery will strongly affect the climatetrajectory in this century. While most policy packages launched can potentially underminethe response to climate urgency, pursuing a green recovery is the minimum to set the worldon track for keeping the Paris Agreement temperature goals within sight.Emission pathways after COVID-19 will be shaped by how governments’ economicresponse translates into infrastructure expansion, energy use, investment planning andsocietal changes. As a response to the COVID-19 crisis, most governments worldwidelaunched recovery packages aiming to boost their economies, support employment andenhance their competitiveness. Climate action is pledged to be embedded in most of thesepackages, but with substantial geographical heterogeneity. In this paper, we provide novelevidence on the energy system and emission implications of post-COVID-19 recoverypackages by assessing the gap between pledged recovery packages and the actual invest-ment needs of the energy transition to reach Paris goals. Using two well-established IAMsand analysing various scenarios combining recovery packages and climate policies, weconclude that the currently planned recovery from COVID-19 is not enough to enhancesocietal responses to climate urgency and should be significantly upscaled and prolongedto ensure compatibility with the Paris Agreement goals.We point out that our impact assessment does not account for economy-wide im-pacts of economic stimulus, sectoral feedbacks, or the effects of money creation throughdiscretionary fiscal policy [36]. Shifts in energy demand caused by societal changes result-ing from the pandemic are not considered either, or those related to furlough schemes,which are noticeably concentrated in the very short term. Additionally, many of the policyinstruments assessed in our simulations imply structural changes across supply chains(e.g., electrification of road transport). Although these changes are explicitly or implicitlyrepresented in our modelling frameworks, we acknowledge that they are often representedin an aggregated way, which can lead to optimistic assumptions about the penetrationrates of technologies. Finally, despite having explored five different scenarios, we have notanalysed the combination of recovery packages with a global carbon pricing mechanism tosustain emission reductions in the longer run [37], which would probably represent thenext step to expand this study.The analysis can be significantly expanded in various dimensions that were not fullycaptured in this paper and could be the source of future works. As observed, recoverypackages cover a wider range of measures other than climate policies, such jobs and firmsdirect support, which are of high relevance for political decision making [38–42]. Assessingthe overall socio-economic impacts of recovery packages and possible policy measures toboost the economy and create jobs (e.g., VAT reduction, investment tax reduction, lowersocial security contributions, etc.), is one dimension to be explored. Other ways to usegreen recovery packages related to energy transition (e.g., subsidies, grants/loans, low-carbon R&D, procurement, fuel mandates, regulation) could be explored, also consideringa broader set of technological options, particularly in sectors where emissions are harder toabate, due to high costs or other barriers. Finally, further improvements can be driven byincluding additional modelling tools towards a multi-model scenario comparison study,such as in [37], to derive more robust policy recommendations and by including real-worlddata and estimations on technology allocation of green recovery packages (which differby country).Energies 2021, 14, 5567 13 of 18Author Contributions: Conceptualization, P.F., R.S. and A.S.; Data curation, L.C.C. and L.B.B.;Formal analysis, P.F., R.G. and L.C.C.; Funding acquisition, P.F. and R.S.; Investigation, L.C.C. andB.S.L.C.; Methodology, P.R.R.R., P.F., R.G., L.B.B. and B.S.L.C.; Resources, P.F. and R.S.; Supervision,P.R.R.R., P.F. and R.S.; Validation, P.F., R.S. and A.S.; Visualization, P.R.R.R., R.G. and L.B.B.; Writing—original draft, P.F., R.G. and L.C.C.; Writing—review and editing, P.F., R.G., L.C.C. and B.S.L.C. Allauthors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: The research leading to this study has received funding from the European Union Horizon2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No 821124 (NAVIGATE) and No101003866 (NDC ASPECTS). Lilia Caiado Couto is funded by the Brazilian Federal Agency forSupport and Evaluation of Graduate Education (CAPES) through the PhD scholarship Programade Doutorado Pleno no Exterior Processo no 88881.129207/2016-01. Bruno Scola Lopes da Cunhawould like to express his gratitude to the financial support from the Human Resources Program ofthe National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas, and Biofuels—PRH-41/ANP/Finep (in Portuguese).Luiz Bernardo Baptista acknowledges the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and TechnologicalDevelopment (CNPq) for funding provided.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: Data can be provided upon request.Acknowledgments: The authors thank André Lucena (COPPE-UFRJ) and Angelo Gurgel (FGV/SP)for their valuable comments on earlier versions of the paper.Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the designof the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, orin the decision to publish the results.Appendix AAppendix A.1 COFFEE-TEA Integrated Assessment Modelling SuiteThe COFFEE-TEA is an integrated assessment modelling suite. The COmputableFramework For Energy and Environment (COFFEE) model is a global perfect-foresight,least-cost optimisation, and partial equilibrium model that is based on the Model forEnergy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental impacts (MESSAGE)platform, a linear programming optimisation platform for energy systems and physicalbalances (mass, energy, exergy and land) developed by the International Institute forApplied System Analysis (IIASA).COFFEE was developed to assess long-term energy supply strategies, based on tech-nological deployment and resource availability, given constraints on GHG emissions andother air pollutants from the energy and land-use systems. Each of the model’s regions hasa detailed representation of energy extraction and conversion technologies, and individu-alised estimates of energy resources (both in terms of volume and costs), which are mostlyreported as cost supply curves. The model accounts for all primary energy produced by theenergy systems and its later transformation into secondary and, further, into final energy.The international trade of the energy commodities is also captured by the model. Finalenergy is consumed by end users to fulfil the energy service demands.Regarding sectoral coverage, COFFEE is divided into five main sectors: Energy,Industry, Transportation, Services/Residential (Buildings) and Agriculture (Table A1).Industry is divided into four subsectors: cement, iron and steel, chemical and otherindustries. The model includes explicit demand for clinker, steel, and non-energy productssuch as plastics and ammonia. Furthermore, there is demand for industry energy services,such as: direct heat; steam; HVAC; lighting; drive; and other uses.The transport sector is divided into freight and passenger transport, measured inton/kilometer (tkm) and passengers/kilometer (pkm), respectively. In COFFEE, the trans-port service is represented by different technologies of private transport (light duty vehicles,motorcycles, three-wheelers) and public transport (buses, trains, ships, airplanes). Each ofthese has a set of technologies varying from energy vector and efficiency levels, includingEnergies 2021, 14, 5567 14 of 18variations of conventional vehicles, flex vehicles, hybrid vehicles, battery electric vehiclesand fuel cell vehicles. Freight transport includes transport technologies such as trucks(Light, Middle and Heavy Duty), trains and ships, with all technologies previously listedfor passenger vehicles also applying for trucks. Additionally, COFFEE relies on the produc-tion of drop-in synthetic fuels (such as diesel, jet fuel and marine bunker) as mitigationoptions for the freight transport sector.The buildings sector includes both the residential and the commercial/public sec-tors. Each subsector has regional energy services demand for: space heating, water heat-ing, cooking, lighting, appliances (electrical) and space cooling. To meet demand, themodel has a range of technology options, ranging from low-efficiency lamps and cookers(non-commercial wood and kerosene), mid-range commercial options of appliances andheaters/air conditioning, up to more advanced options, such as LED lamps and highlyefficient appliances. This sector also presents Distributed Generation (DG) options, eitherthrough photovoltaic (PV) or solar water heating.Residues and agriculture sectors have a lesser impact on the energy consumption,despite being significant socioeconomic and environmental sectors. As for residues, theyinclude the water management and municipal solid wastes. This sector has a low energy(mostly electric) consumption, but its mitigation options have a great impact on non-CO2emissions, including options for renewable energy, such as landfill gas and incineration. Re-garding agriculture, the energy consumption for agricultural practices and crop processingis accounted in COFFEE.The land-use system also presents several mitigation options through the adoptionof sustainable practices and production of bioenergy, all of which are fundamental inlong-term climate stabilisation scenarios. COFFEE derives from most global integratedassessment models in two manners: spatial resolution and integration with other sectors.Firstly, COFFEE does not have a spatial explicit representation of the land system. Themodel includes cost categories of each land cover to represent a cost supply curve ofavailable land for use and land use change. As such, the cost supply curve for bioenergy,for instance, is completely endogenous and subject to competition for other land uses, suchas crop and livestock production. Nonetheless, COFFEE also differs from most IAMs inthe sense that the integration between the energy and the land-use systems is hard linked,meaning that its optimal solution accounts for the constraints and costs of both sectorssimultaneously, including any potential trade-offs and synergies.The Total-Economy Assessment (TEA) is a global top-down, recursive dynamic, Com-putable General Equilibrium (CGE) model. TEA uses the general equilibrium microe-conomic theory as an operational tool in empirical analyses. The model simulates theevolution of the global economy, capturing industry-to-industry linkages, to assess policieson issues related to climate change, energy transitions, resource allocation, trade flows,technological change, income distribution, among others.TEA is built as a mixed (non-linear) complementary problem on Mathematical Pro-gramming System for General Equilibrium (MPSGE), a tool written in the General AlgebraicModelling System (GAMS) software. To reach the general equilibrium of the economy, theTEA model assumes total market clearance (supply equals demand through commodityprice equilibrium), zero profit condition for producers and perfect competition. The equi-librium is obtained when prices and quantities (endogenous variables) are balanced so thatagents cannot improve their situation (welfare) by changing their behaviour, nor makingother agents worse-off (Pareto optimal condition).Production in each sector is represented by multi-level nested Constant Elasticityof Substitution (CES) functions, which use intermediate goods, labour, capital, land andenergy as their input. The CES functions describe the substitution possibilities betweenfactors of production and intermediate inputs in the production process, based on aleast-cost approach. International trade follows Armington’s aggregation [43], in whicha composite CES function differentiates consumer’s preferences between imported anddomestic goods. Consumer preferences (household sector) are expressed by a CES utilityEnergies 2021, 14, 5567 15 of 18function. Firms maximise their profits and the household sector maximises its welfare(utility) under budget constraints. Such choices are determined by the parameters ofsubstitution and transformation elasticities in the utility and production functions.In the TEA model, the macroeconomic closure assumes full employment of the factorsof production (capital and labour). Savings equal investment in the general equilibrium,but regionally the imbalances are closed by a surplus (or deficit) in the current account. Anendogenous real exchange rate clears the current accounts and the capital account decreasesexogenously in the long-run. Capital stock evolves at each period with the formation ofnew capital that depends on the investment level in that period and the capital depreciationrate [44].COFFEE and TEA models are long-term global models suitable for policies and climateaspects evaluation. They are integrated and have perfect compatibility in terms of baseyear data, sectoral and regional disaggregation. The COFFEE model provides data inputsfor electricity generation and production shares to the TEA model, which accounts for thetransformation of primary energy (coal, natural gas and crude oil) to secondary energy (oilproducts and electricity) to be consumed by end-use sectors, such as transport sectors (land,air and waterway) and energy-intensive industries (iron and steel, chemical, non-metallicminerals and other manufactures). The food production and land-use systems, whichinclude the agricultural and livestock sectors, are also represented in the TEA model. Thesectoral coverage comprehends 21 sectors that can be grouped into the five main sectorsrepresented in the COFFEE model (Table A1).Table A1. Sectoral coverage in COFFEE-TEA IAM suite.COFFEE TEA DescriptionAgricultureAGR AgricultureCTL CattleOAP Other animal productsFSH FishingEnergyCOL CoalCRU Crude oilELE ElectricityGAS Natural gasOIL Oil productsIndustryI_S Iron and steelCRP Chemical rubber and plasticNMM Manufacture of non-metallic mineral productsMAN Other manufactureOFD Other food (except meat)OMT Other meat productsTransportationOTP Land transportWTP Water transportATP Air transportServices SER ServicesResidential DWE DwellingsTEA and COFFEE are divided into the same 18 regions, including large representa-tive economic regions/countries, such as Europe, China, USA and Japan, while puttingemphasis on developing countries in which energy and environmental issues are relevantglobally, such as India and Brazil (Figure A1). In addition, COFFEE has a global regionrepresented as the 19th region of the model for the assessment of global climate policies.Energies 2021, 14, 5567 16 of 18Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16  of  19   Table A1. Sectoral coverage in COFFEE‐TEA IAM suite. COFFEE  TEA  Description Agriculture AGR  Agriculture CTL  Cattle OAP  Other animal products FSH  Fishing Energy COL  Coal CRU  Crude oil ELE  Electricity GAS  Natural gas OIL  Oil products Industry I_S  Iron and steel CRP  Chemical rubber and plastic NMM  Manufacture of non‐metallic mineral products MAN  Other manufacture OFD  Other food (except meat) OMT  Other meat products Transportation OTP  Land transport WTP  Water transport ATP  Air transport Services  SER  Services Residential  DWE  Dwellings TEA and COFFEE are divided into the same 18 regions, including large representa‐tive economic regions/countries, such as Europe, China, USA and Japan, while putting emphasis on developing countries in which energy and environmental issues are relevant globally, such as India and Brazil (Figure A1). In addition, COFFEE has a global region represented as the 19th region of the model for the assessment of global climate policies.  Figure A1. Regional breakdown of the COFFEE‐TEA IAM suite. The COFFEE‐TEA suite is included in the category of IAMs that combines techno‐economic and environmental variables to generate a cost‐optimal solution in a hybrid ap‐proach;  bottom‐up  technological  solution with  top‐down macroeconomic  consistency. Figure A1. Regional breakdown of the COFFEE-TEA IAM suite.The COFFEE-TEA su te is included in the category f IAM hat c mbines techno-econ mic and environmental v riables o generate a c st-optimal solution in a hybridap roa ; bottom-up tech ological solutio with top-d wn macroeconomic consistency.COFFEE fully represents energy markets, while TEA pr