How can Zimbabwe leverage its mineral resources for economic recovery and sustainable growth

	
   	
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HOW CAN ZIMBABWE LEVERAGE ITS MINERAL 
RESOURCES FOR ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND 
SUSTAINABLE GROWTH. 
 
 
by 
 
BEAUTY ZIKITI 
 
Student No. 0715360R 
 
Ethics Protocol No: CECON/1032 
 
 
Dissertation submitted to the University of the Witwatersrand, Faculty 
of Commerce, Law and Management in partial fulfilment of the 
requirement of the degree of  
MASTER OF COMMERCE IN DEVELOPMENT THEORY AND 
POLICY 
 
Supervisor: 
 
 
Dr Paul Jourdan 
 
 
University of the Witwatersrand  
Faculty of Commerce, Law and Management 
School of Economics and Business Sciences – SEBS 
Corporate Strategy and Industrial Development (CSID) 
 
	
   ii 
 
DECLARATION 
 
 
 
I, BEAUTY ZIKITI, hereby declare that this thesis is my own, unaided work. It is 
submitted in fulfilment of the requirements of the degree of Master of Commerce 
(Mcom) in the School of Economics and Business Sciences, Faculty of Commerce, 
Law and Management, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg. It has not been 
submitted before for any other degree or to any other university for degree purposes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIGNATURE ………………………… 
 
                day of 31 March, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
   iii 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
 
Zimbabwe’s mineral sector has been the major contributor of the national economy’s Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) since the economic meltdown post land reform programme. The 
scale of the crisis resulted in the adoption of the multicurrency system in 2009. In an 
attempt to save the economy from total collapse the government has turned to the mining 
sector to establish linkages through mineral beneficiation. This study has analysed whether 
the creation of linkages in the mineral sector, through beneficiation and value addition, 
could resuscitate the economy. Literature on natural resources shows that countries that are 
resource-rich experience slow growth rates than resource-poor countries. The study found 
that mineral resource dependency could be a platform or foundation for economic growth 
and developmental opportunities through linkages creation in the mineral sector. However, 
resource-based development strategy is a challenging development path that needs a strong 
state with vested capacity to actively direct and co-ordinate economic transformation 
through deepening of the resource sector. Political tensions in Zimbabwe are the overriding 
obstacles to economic linkages creation in the mining sector and across other sectors. It is 
therefore, imperative to understand the socio-economic and political dynamics and 
interactions that influence and shape policy decisions, implementation and their outcomes 
in order for Zimbabwe to optimise economic linkages and revive its economy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
   iv 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
I would like to thank the Lord Almighty for giving me the strength to work through this 
research. Without His guidance it would not have been possible. I would also like to extend 
my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Dr Paul Jourdan for his insightful advice and 
assistance in writing this research. To my husband, Tumai, thank you for your continued 
support, understanding and inspirational advice. To my lovely two children, Makanaka and 
Tawananyasha, thank you for your patience and understanding. I would also like to express 
my sincere appreciation and gratitude to my sister Alice Zikiti for her assistance in taking 
care of my kids while I was working on this research report. I wish to thank my parents for 
their never-ending prayers.   
Finally, I am much indebted to a great family friend, Mr Rodney Ndamba and family who, 
despite his busy schedule, find the time to assist me during my field trip in Zimbabwe to 
make this work a complete product.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
	
   v 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AMV    African Mining Vision 
ANC     African National Congress (SA) 
COMZ   Chamber of Mines of Zimbabwe 
CSOTs    Community Share Ownership Trusts 
CSR    Corporate Social Responsibility 
ESOTs    Employee Share Ownership Trusts 
EU    European Union  
FDI    Foreign Direct Investment 
GDP     Gross Domestic Product 
IEEP    Indigenisation and Economic Empowerment  
Policy 
           IMF                                 International Monetary Fund               
IMR     Institute of Mining Research 
KPCS   Kimberly Process Certificate Schemes 
MDC    Movement for Democratic Change 
MMCZ   Minerals Marketing Corporation of Zimbabwe 
NMWUZ   National Mines Workers Union of Zimbabwe 
OECD  Organisation for Economic Cooperation and   
  Development 
PACK   Protect All Children Today 
PGMs   Platinum Group Metals 
R&D   Research and Development 
ROI                                  Returns on Investment 
RRT                                 Resource Rents Tax 
SWF                                 Sovereign Wealth Fund 
US                                    United States 
WB  World Bank 
ZANU-PF   Zimbabwe African National Union- Patriotic  
  Front 
ZimAsset  Zimbabwe’s Agenda for Sustainable Socio- 
  Economic Transformation 
ZIMASCO   Zimbabwe Mining and Smelting Company  
ZIMRA  Zimbabwe Revenue Authority 
ZISCO   Zimbabwe Iron and Steel Company 
ZMDC  Zimbabwe Mining Development Corporation 
ZELA   Zimbabwe Environmental Law Association 
 
 
	
   vi 
 
Table of Contents 
Chapter 1. Introduction ....................................................................................................... 1 
1.1. Background Context .................................................................................................... 1 
1.2. Brief Introduction of Zimbabwe’s Mineral Sector. ..................................................... 3 
1.3 Research Problem / Problem Statement ....................................................................... 5 
1.3. Research Question ....................................................................................................... 6 
1.4. Rationale or Significance of the study ......................................................................... 6 
1.6. Research Aims and Objectives .................................................................................... 7 
1.7 Research Methodology ................................................................................................. 7 
1.8. Data collection instruments ......................................................................................... 7 
1.9. Outline of the study ..................................................................................................... 9 
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Context ................................................. 10 
2.1. Theoretical and analytical framework ....................................................................... 10 
2.2. The neo-classical perspective: resource curse theory ................................................ 11 
2.3. Questioning the resource curse model from a political economy perspective .......... 13 
2.4. Gaps in the literature / theoretical gaps ..................................................................... 14 
2.5. Conclusion ................................................................................................................. 15 
Chapter 3. The political economy perspective for leveraging the mineral sector ........ 16 
3.1. The linkages theory ................................................................................................... 16 
3.2. Building Linkages and promoting diversification ..................................................... 18 
3.3. Industrial policy: The role of the state ....................................................................... 20 
3.4. Shifting from mineral resource dependence to industrialisation ............................... 22 
3.5. Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 24 
Chapter 4. Policy Environment and the Political Economy Dynamics ......................... 25 
4.1. Government initiatives: policy instruments ............................................................... 25 
4.2. Fiscal revenue measures ............................................................................................ 29 
4.4. Policy inconsistency and unpredictability ................................................................. 32 
4.5. Conclusion ................................................................................................................. 32 
Chapter 5. Research Findings and Discussion ................................................................. 34 
5.2. Results ....................................................................................................................... 34 
5.3. Data Analysis ............................................................................................................. 35 
5.4.  Discussion Section .................................................................................................... 41 
5.5. Limitations ................................................................................................................. 48 
5.6. Policy implications .................................................................................................... 48 
Chapter 6: Conclusion and Recommendations ................................................................ 52 
6.1 Recommendations ...................................................................................................... 54 
Bibliography. ....................................................................................................................... 56 
List of Figure and Tables ................................................................................................... 64 
Appendix .............................................................................................................................. 65 
Semi-Structured Interview Questions .............................................................................. 65 
	
   1 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
 
1.1. Background Context 
 
Zimbabwe is endowed with abundant mineral resources (African Development Bank 
Group, 2013), and like most Sub-Saharan African countries, it is dependent on 
primary production for exports and economic growth (Chamber of Mines, 2009). 
Throughout the country’s history, mining activities have been practiced including 
artisanal mining in gold. However, some of the vast minerals are not fully exploited 
due to lack of infrastructure and capital (Chamber of mines, 2013). The economic 
deterioration of Zimbabwe started in the early 2000 with the land redistribution 
process. The Land reform program presented enormous challenges as well as 
opportunities to the country’s leadership. One of the challenges was dealing with the 
rapid economic decline, which manifested in skyrocketing inflation rate.  
 
The country also started to lose comparative advantage in the agricultural sector due 
to chaotic land grabs and invasions mostly by war veterans that affected the country’s 
commercial farming sector. The land reform programme also resulted in unintended 
economic and political consequences (the rapid raise of the opposition party, 
Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) that attempted to muscle the ruling party, 
the Zimbabwe National African Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) out of power, 
ultimately leading to the formation of an inclusive government in 2008 (Kisiangani, 
2009). The disruptions in industries and agricultural production resulted in 
significantly lower receipts from exports, the shutting down of industries and 
unemployment. The spiral of economic contraction resulted in decreased revenues 
and a lack of real money circulating in the economy and overall macroeconomic 
instability, ultimately forcing the economy to adopt a multicurrency system (Chamber 
of Mines, 2013). This policy response as well as loans and mineral revenues from 
China managed to turn the economy around as shown in figure 1 below. 
 
 
 
 
 
	
   2 
 
Figure 1. Zimbabwe GDP Growth 
  
Source: WB data online 2015. 
 
However, despite the “look East’ policy, the mounting economic problems and 
political tensions that followed the land redistribution programmme proved difficult 
for the Zimbabwean government to completely revive its agriculture although some 
pockets of success start to emerge (Hanlon, Manjengwa & Smart, 2013).  Against this 
background, this study analyses how the mineral sector can become the cornerstone 
for an economic turnaround in Zimbabwe.  
 
Literature on mineral resource abundance and economic development points to the 
resource ‘curse’ associated with mineral dependency that causes negative correlation 
between mineral dependency and economic GDP growth rates in commodity-
dependent countries. (Sachs & Warmer, 1995), However, other studies have 
challenged this conclusion by Sachs and Warmer contending that natural resource can 
be a ‘blessing’ as the development experience of other countries (United State, 
Sweden and Finland) show. Commodity dependency was an anchor to industrial 
development in these economies. (Campbell, 2010) (Collier & Goderis, 2007), 
(Rosser, 2006).  While this study focuses on mineral resource it excludes oil and gas, 
which are beyond the limited scope of the study. Growing research on mineral 
resources and economic growth across mineral-rich countries has led to new ideas and 
perspectives for harnessing mineral the resources towards sustainable growth. 
	
   3 
(Campbell, 2010), (Commission of Africa, 2003). The thesis statement for this study 
is that the beneficiation of mineral resources in Zimbabwe can resuscitate the 
economy because mineral resources play a transformational role of creating linkages 
and diversification. Properly and sustainably extracted, resources can be the backbone 
of economic growth and development. 
 
1.2. Brief Introduction of Zimbabwe’s Mineral Sector.  
 
Zimbabwe has a diverse mining sector with more than forty different minerals 
(Mhembere, 2009), and with the increasing demand for primary mineral commodities 
in the open-integrated world economy, mineral export revenues have remained a 
larger share of GDP.   The mining sector contributes a significant share of (GDP) to 
the economy although the agriculture sector remains the major contributor since 
independence in 1980 up until the early 2000s (Hawkins, 2009). Given the decline in 
the agriculture production and the on-going fiscal problems, the government now 
seeks to optimise the minerals sector in order to revive the economy. This policy shift 
has coincided with, and is spurred by the discovery of diamond deposits in Marange 
in 2006 and in other parts of the country (Sibanda & Makore, 2013) and the 
development of the Platinum Group Metals (PGMs) resources (from 2002). In 2011, 
Zimbabwe’s mineral output amounted to about 7% of the world's diamond production 
(by volume), 5% of the world's platinum production, and about 4% of the world's 
palladium output (Chamber of Mines of Zimbabwe).  
 
Recently, a plethora of policy instruments have been developed to regulate the mining 
industry in a bid to stimulate economic growth and recovery as well as redress 
historical injustices of the colonial era that excluded blacks from mainstream 
economy (Chamber of Mines: 2009). These include the Minerals Development Policy 
developed in 2013, the Diamond Policy Act adopted in 2012, the Mines and Minerals 
Amendment Bill of 2010, the Indigenisation and Economic Empowerment Act 
adopted in 2008 and the Sovereign Wealth Act, that provides for the establishment of 
a Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) among others. Theoretically, the Draft Minerals 
Development Policy addresses the major issues to be tackled by various government 
ministries. These include sound structures of rents capture or taxation system, 
redeployment of these rents, the creation of a sovereign wealth fund, a community 
	
   4 
fund, and the creation of government institutions that are responsible for investment 
in the mining sector.  
This policy will replace the old colonial mineral policy framed in the Mines and 
Mineral Act that was enacted in 1961 (Dhliwayo, 2014). The Mines and Minerals Act 
is now out-dated and disempowering as it was biased towards a small privileged 
settler population (“claims” system). The draft policy is an acknowledgement that the 
colonial policy had outlived its purposes and now is time to put more emphasis on 
reinvestment or deployment of the resource rents into the economy. The draft also 
aims to promote the expansion and integration of large and small sectors through 
linkages to sustain domestic production. The Indigenisation and Economic 
Empowerment Act [Chapter 14:33] deals mainly with the issue of mining rights while 
enabling increased local participation as all foreign companies should cede 51% of 
equity to indigenous Zimbabweans (Chamber of Mines, 2009). Locally, the policy 
framework is regarded as a progressive economic development instrument, but 
internationally it has been received with mixed reactions. Capital interests look at it as 
expropriation and in violation of international investment protection regimes. In 
principle, the policy aims to redress historical injustices and empower historically 
disadvantaged local investors to participate in the mainstream economy. The problem 
with this policy lies in its implementation as elaborated in Chapter 5. 
  
The new thinking in transforming the mining industry is also reflected in the 
Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation (ZimAsset) 
(2013-2018). This crucial policy blueprint was developed in 2013 by government and 
it emphasises beneficiation and value addition not only for higher returns but also as a 
strategy to promote industrialisation and economic growth. ZimAsset is paramount to 
the mining industry as it highlights that the debate in the resource extraction sector is 
moving beyond export revenues to beneficiation and value addition (Chamber of 
Mines, 2013). These policy instruments are a step further towards economic recovery, 
but what is uncertain is whether there are sufficient policy strategies and capital to 
promote effective implementation. Thus, the policy reforms have not yet stimulated 
significant mining-led development. Implementation is key to reviving investment 
and growth in the minerals sector, especially in the current political milieu in the 
country. 
 
	
   5 
Persisting political unpredictability and policy uncertainty in Zimbabwe are likely to 
hinder the successful establishment of the aforementioned economic linkages. 
Relative political instability and economic decline that started with the land reform 
program in the early 2000 have resulted in policy inconsistencies and weak legal and 
institutional frameworks that have reduced investor confidence in the mining sector 
(Hawkins, 2009), (Sibanda & Makore, 2013). The so-called “smart sanctions” or trade 
sanctions imposed by the West, in particular, the United States (US) and the European 
Union (EU) on Zimbabwe have fuelled the political and economic problems as the 
country cannot borrow from, or trade with the West. 
This study unpacks the potential for Zimbabwe’s mineral endowment to catalyse 
sustainable economic recovery and growth by creating economic linkages (upstream, 
downstream, spatial, fiscal and knowledge) in the mineral resource sector. The study 
looks at some key mineral resources, which include platinum group metals (PGMs), 
iron ore, coal, chromium, nickel, steel, copper, gold, and diamonds. Diversification in 
minerals makes economic sense rather than relying solely on a single commodity. 
Wright and Czelusta (2003) note that “excessive reliance on a single commodity for 
export earnings is unwise, especially if the market in question is volatile and if it 
provides the major source of government revenues...” Hence this study focuses on 
different mineral resources.  
	
  
1.3 Research Problem / Problem Statement  
 
This study critically analyses whether the establishment of mineral-based linkages in 
mining sector can contribute to economic recovery in Zimbabwe. Following the 
steady decline in agriculture production, partly due to the land reform program of 
2000 to 2010, mineral extraction has become a focus for economic growth. Currently 
mining has replaced agriculture as the major contributor to the country’s GDP through 
export revenues and taxes such as royalties and corporate tax. In order for Zimbabwe 
to successfully revive its economy, once the breadbasket of Southern Africa, the 
government must leverage its mineral extraction sector so that it becomes a platform 
for broader economic growth.  
 
	
   6 
The current political climate, energy constraints and fiscal problems in Zimbabwe 
pose a major threat to the optimisation of the mineral sector to achieve economic 
recovery. Failure to transform and create economic linkages with the mining sector 
will imply that economic recovery will not be met. Studies have shown that resource 
rich countries, particularly in Africa, have been associated with low economic growth 
levels and development due to the resource curse thesis, corruption, and rent-seeking 
behaviour. (Collier & Goderis, 2007) (Rosser, 2006). Although the resource curse 
thesis associated with mineral rich countries has been widely documented, there is 
limited research on how to optimise the mineral sector in order to address or minimise 
the resource curse problem and achieve economic development. Recent literature 
(such as (Smillie, 2009), (Hawkins, 2009) and other Non-Governmental Organisations 
(NGO)) has focused on the issue of government transparency and accountability on 
rents capture without necessarily nailing or providing possible solutions for the 
country to benefit from mining extraction and use the sector as a base load growth 
tool for economic recovery. 	
  
	
  
1.3. Research Question 
 
The key question in this research is: how can Zimbabwe leverage its mineral 
resources for sustainable economic recovery and growth? 
  
1.3.1 Sub-Questions 
 
a) What is the relationship between mineral resources and economic growth? 
b) How does the minerals sector offer opportunities for upstream, downstream 
and side-stream industrialisation (economic linkages including  beneficiation)? 
c) How does the problem of political economy affect the growth of the mining 
sector in Zimbabwe?  
	
  
1.4. Rationale or Significance of the study 
 
There has been limited research in Zimbabwe on how the minerals sector can be 
leveraged as a launchpad for sustainable economic growth and broader development 
so that these extractive resources can be converted into other forms of capital that 
move the country into other development activities. The revived intellectual interest in 
	
   7 
mining activities, around beneficiation in Africa, juxtaposed with a persistent 
economic decline in Zimbabwe underscores the significance of this study. The study 
contributes to the existing literature on minerals extraction and economic 
development. 
1.6. Research Aims and Objectives  
 
The purpose of this study is to explain and understand how mineral resource 
extraction can be optimised for the recovery and growth of the Zimbabwean 
economy. The main objective is to critically analyse the challenges and opportunities 
of resource extraction, and suggest alternative pathways to incentivise economic 
linkages. The study contributes to the knowledge gap in the literature on mineral 
resources (debate on resource curse and economic growth) and more importantly, to 
the national debate on the alternative paths available for Zimbabwe’s economic 
recovery. The target audience of this research are academics, government policy 
makers, students and other mining stakeholders. 
 
1.7 Research Methodology 
  
This research employed a qualitative-analytical approach of semi- structured 
interviews to address the research question. Qualitative research methodology refers 
to research that relies on descriptive data. This approach is mostly interpretive rather 
than scientific. According to Schwandt (2001), qualitative researchers seek meaning 
of human action. The qualitative methodology approach was preferred because it 
allows one to investigate the ‘how and why’ questions in decision-making which 
allows for in-depth analysis. Although this approach is limited by subjectivity, it is 
also theoretically generalizable. 
 
1.8. Data collection instruments 
 
The data collection methods used to carry out the study are semi-structured interviews 
for gathering primary data and desktop data analysis. The in-depth semi-structured 
interviews were conducted with government officials, government policy makers, and 
academic experts in the mining and mineral resources field. The research used semi-
structured interviews, which are significant tools for getting factual data and valuable 
information from the context of participants’ experiences, and to allow respondents to 
	
   8 
express their knowledge and insights in their own frameworks. Structured interviews 
and observations for instance were not chosen as they are limited in terms of getting 
more information. Observations only provide the meaning but do not explain why the 
situation or the economic status is like that for example. Thus, observations often 
paint a picture that is based on subjectivity. While quantitative methodology is seen as 
objective, is does not adequately address the why question. In addition, the use of 
mathematics and statistical numbers in quantitative methodology can be bias if the 
figures are not carefully disaggregated.  
 
Government ministries and civil society organisations that were contacted for 
interviews (data collection) are as follows: the Chamber of Mines of Zimbabwe 
(COMZ), the Ministry of Mines and Mining Development, the Zimbabwe Mining 
Development Corporation (ZMDC), Zimbabwe Revenue Authority (ZIMRA), the 
Economic Policy Analysis and Research Unit (ZEPARU), the Institute of Mining 
Research (IMR), Protect All Children Today (PACT), Zimbabwe Environmental Law 
Association (ZELA), the National Mines Workers Union of Zimbabwe (NMWUZ). 
 
The research also used other primary data that has been already collected. This 
primary data was accessed from government policy and statistical documents and 
other relevant institutions. The study also made use of secondary data such as books, 
scholarly journals, articles, and online sources to interpret, critic and supplement 
primary data. Secondary data is necessary for this study as it help to provide 
analytical views, explanation and understanding of the debate around resource led 
economic development and resource curse thesis particularly in Africa. Secondary 
data analysis also helps remedy bias from interview participants. 
 
This study employed a qualitative analysis approach in order to gain insights of how 
to leverage the mineral sector for economic recovery and to acquire a critical 
understanding of the political economy of resource based economic growth and 
development. A number of official government documents including budget 
statements will be analysed to establish the production and revenues changes in the 
mining sector. The UN country development reports, World Bank reports and the 
statements from the treasury were also analysed to produce a research report that 
addressed also the political dimensions of establishing mineral – based linkages rather 
	
   9 
than showing the economic technical aspects only. The research outline is discussed 
below. 
  
1.9. Outline of the study 
 
Chapter 2 of this study analyses the literature on mineral resource dependence and 
slow economic growth (resource curse thesis). The chapter start by discussing the 
neo-classical perspective of resource curse in mineral rich countries. It will then 
proceeds to question the neo-classical analysis of natural resource dependence and 
slow growth In this regard, it identifies the gaps in the literature. Chapter 3 discusses 
the linkages theory from a political economy perspective. It analyses the rational for 
beneficiating the mineral resources and the role of the state in promoting beneficiation 
and diversification. In chapter 4 the study looks at policy space for beneficiation of 
mineral resources in Zimbabwe by analysing some of the policy initiatives adopted by 
the government. The chapter the goes on to analyse the political economy dynamics 
surrounding the linkages creation in mining industry and its effect on policy 
outcomes. Chapter 5 starts by providing an overview of Zimbabwe’s mining sector. 
This follows an analysis and discussion of upstream, downstream, side-stream 
linkages. It provides a conclusion from the insights gathered from the semi-
interviews. Chapter 6 summarises the findings of the study by tying together the 
theoretical and empirical strands of the study and provides a conclusion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
   10 
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Context 
 
2.1. Theoretical and analytical framework 
 
The theoretical framework underpinning this study is that mineral resources can be a 
‘blessing’ and can steer economic development and sustainable growth by creating 
linkages with other productive sectors, mainly the industrial and infrastructure sectors. 
The resource curse theory has an incredibly wide credence among neo-classical 
theorists, but the empirical evidence shown that there is no resource curse but rather, a 
capitalist crisis. Fine (2008) posits that capitalism is inherently unstable and therefore 
it needs constant monitoring. Modern industrial capitalism has produced exploitative 
structural economic relationships mainly between the resource-rich countries and the 
global mining companies that are driven by profit maximisation (Di John, 2011) 
(Barma, et al, 2010). Fine (1997) argues that the resource curse theory is “an 
ideological fix that seek to avert the crisis of legitimacy faced by capitalist 
development that is driven and pioneered by predatory MNCs and foreign investors”. 
Multinational companies constrain the autonomy of the state to purse their desired 
development path.  
 
The acknowledged importance of mineral extraction as a catalyst to economic 
development in Zimbabwe and the potential of the mining sector to foster 
development linkages, confirm the significance of this study. The research engages in 
both the neo-classical mainstream and political economy approaches to mineral-based 
development. The mainstream economic literature provides a theoretical analysis 
around the debate of the resource curse, the Dutch Disease, weak institutions, 
corruption, state capacity, and rent seeking behaviour. This literature review starts by 
analysing critically the debate on resource-dependency and economic stagnation from 
both neoclassical economic and political economy perspective. This is important in 
unpacking the resource curse thesis. This follows an evaluation of the contemporary 
literature on mineral led development through backward and forward linkages. Thus, 
the purpose of the literature review is to provide a comprehensive understanding and 
critique of the debates around mineral led development, in order to present more 
applicable solutions to escape the curse. This literature review contributes to building 
	
   11 
an analytical policy capacity to challenge the conventional wisdom of the resource 
curse in resource-rich economies.  
	
  
2.2. The neo-classical perspective: resource curse theory 
 
The history of resource dependency and structural change is rooted in the discovery of 
gas and how this affected industrial structure of the Netherlands and later the north 
sea oil and the United Kingdom. It is argued that these countries experienced 
economic stagnation especially in manufacturing sectors due to the resource booms 
that strengthened their domestic currency. This came to be known as ‘Dutch Disease’ 
whereby an appreciation of local currency due to resource boom undermined the 
productivity performance of traded sector as labour and capital is shifted to the 
mineral sector (Arezki &Van der Ploeg, 2007), (Di John, 2011), (Jourdan, 2012).  
 
The neo-classical theory assumes that resource-rich countries are unable to harness 
the wealth to boost economic growth since mining-led development is constrained by 
the Dutch disease, global price shocks in commodity markets, rent seeking behaviour, 
weak and corrupt government institutions, among other factors (Van der Ploeg, 2007). 
Mainstream theorists who viewed government intervention in the economy as bad for 
economic development also supported the resource curse theory. State interventions 
are seen as leading to price distortions, corruption and rent seeking behaviour 
(economic rents for the privileged few), which ultimately result in market 
disequilibrium (Smith, 2004).  
 
According to the neoclassical theorists, a viable way to abolish corruption and rent 
seeking behaviour for achieving rapid economic development was to roll back the 
state (Rapley, 2002; Fine, 1997). The state was to be replaced by functioning 
institutions. The establishment of institutions (both political and economic 
institutions) is seen as purposive as these institutions are supposed to be efficient-
maximising structures. The neoclassical theorists thus, overlook the problem of 
information asymmetries and inefficiencies inherent in some institutions. The idea 
that the state was distracting market operations were strengthened by the introduction 
of structural adjustment policies but the model however came with its own shortfalls 
(Rapley, 2002). 
	
   12 
Literature on resource-based economic development dwells much on the idea that 
mineral activity or commodity production is an unsustainable short-term growth due 
to the inherently finite nature of the mineral activity (Di John, 2011) (Rosser, 2006). 
The main point on resource dependency literature is that natural resources are cursed 
hence governments especially in developing countries should exercise caution. Thus, 
since the mining industry is generally seen as an enclave sector that is capital 
intensive (of imported machinery and equipment) resulting in less division of labour, 
the creation of linkages with other sectors (such as manufacturing) becomes crucial. 
There is evidence to support that the manufacturing sector creates more backward and 
forward linkages than the primary sector. Sachs and Warner (1995) argue that more 
economic resources should be channelled towards the manufacturing sector since it is 
associated with learning-by-doing effects relative to primary sectors such as mining 
and agriculture  
The neo-classical theorists further assert that resource dependency or resource 
abundant economies experience poor growth performance due to corruption and weak 
institutions mostly in developing countries such as Latin American and African 
countries (Lane & Tornell, (1996) as cited in Arezki & Van der Ploeg, 2007, Di John, 
2011, Barma et al, 2012). They also argue that resource abundant economies are 
further susceptible to rent-seeking since the concentration of mineral wealth in either 
the private or public sector is in the hands of the few elites (small number of players). 
Therefore, it is argued that such high concentration of wealth or resource rents distract 
government attention away from long-term economic development goals towards rent 
seeking (Smith, 2004). However, Marxist theorist Paul Baran contributed to the 
debate by arguing that most poor countries with slow growth rates were dominated by 
local elites whose interests are not in line with national developmental goals but with 
those of the multinational companies (Di John, 2011). This can be seen in instances 
where the business elites and foreign multinationals favour certain policies, such as 
protectionist economic measures, capital flow deregulations or overvaluation of the 
local currency that function to maintain their dominant positions at the expense of 
society as a whole (Rosser, 2006). 
 
 
	
   13 
Thus, Vatansever and Gillies (2009,15) provide a nice quote: 
“Despite the primacy of the state, all power does not rest with government officials and 
institutions. Rather, the ruling elite comprise individuals and groups both within and outside 
government who together assert a monopolistic control of wealth. In particular, a “class of 
rent-seeking pseudo-entrepreneurs” enjoys an umbilical relationship with the state. These 
business elites are intertwined in the state capture of resource rents and prove to be 
entrenched obstacles in the face of transformative measures. Together with this rent-seeking 
dynamic between political and economic elites, the intrusion of the state in the economy—as a 
result of its control over natural resource sector activities—blurs the distinction between 
public and private”. (Vatansever & Gillies, 2009:15 as cited by Barma et al, 2012: 49). 
 
Vatansever & Gillies, 2009 shed light on the overall debate on mineral extraction and 
mining-led development. The issue of rents capture must be analysed in detail as 
studies on mining activities have merely focused on corruption and rent-seeking 
behaviour by states and government officials while turning a blind eye on the 
operations of private business elites and multinational corporations.  
 
2.3. Questioning the resource curse model from a political economy perspective   
 
Some neoclassical theorists argue that natural resource abundance in general and oil 
wealth in particular is positively associated with slow economic development cross-
nationally. However, resource abundance may have both negative and positive effects 
in different environments, but this effect cannot be generalized across space and time 
(Smith and Kraus 2005; Dunning 2008). Dependency and structuralists theorists are 
well known opponents of natural resource export specialisation who argued that 
primary products were subject to declining terms of trade between the prices of 
commodities and those of manufactures (Prebisch & Singer, (1950) as cited in 
Kaplinsky, 2011:6). Dependency theorists also argued against commodities exports 
because of price volatility of raw materials (Di John, 2011:167). (Kaplinsky, 2011).  
 
Dependency theorists further posit that the domination of foreign multinational in 
natural resources extraction (particularly in developing countries) undermine mineral 
led development and growth efforts due to profit expatriation. The argument is that 
multinational investors have no incentive to reinvest their profits in the extractive 
country or in promoting national development goals of these economies since they are 
	
   14 
merely profit driven (Di John, 2011) (Barma, et al, 2010). It is argued further by 
dependency theorists that resource abundance has compelled developing countries 
into the global capitalist system as the developed countries and MNCs scramble for 
access to their resources for their own economic development and capital 
accumulation respectively (Rosser, 2006:19.) This view is also shared by Amin, 
(2014) who argues that the integration of the developing countries into the global 
capitalist system is merely to maintain their current economic position, (commodity 
export-oriented economies) as suppliers of raw materials to the developed countries. 
Amin’s argument is that economic integration is important but the question that needs 
to be raised is not “to which degree the various regions are integrated, but in which 
way they are integrated” (Amin, 2014:29).  
 
Thus, the debate on resource dependency and resource curse poses serious policy and 
intellectual challenge. Although there are acknowledgements that resource curse 
theory undermines the pace of economic growth and development, there are serious 
disagreements on how to remedy the problem. Indeed it is not strategic to say that the 
solution to the resource curse problem is simply to ignore these natural endowments 
when most of African economies have a comparative advantage in mineral resources 
(Deaton, 1999 as cited in Lorentzen, 2006). Various studies establish the relationship 
between mineral resource abundance and levels of economic development, and they 
show that resource endowment is not always a ‘curse’ but can be a ‘blessing’  
(Arezki and Van der Ploeg, 2007), (Collier & Goderis, 2007). Although Campbell, 
(2010) asserts that the curse has been in the poor management of the exploitation of 
the resources, bad policies, corruption, lack of revenue transparency and leakages; Di 
John, (2011) and Gylfason, 2001 as cited in Lorentzen, (2006:3) put it another way. 
They suggest that poor growth performance is not explained by relative abundance of 
natural resources but by what a country does with it.  
 
2.4.Gaps in the literature / theoretical gaps 
 
First, the resource curse theory lacks a strong analysis of the underlying political and 
socio-economic factors that result in slow economic growth across countries due to 
historical consequences. Second, the theory does not stand the test of time, in which 
globalisation and economic integration have shaped the nature of international trade 
	
   15 
and economic development, wrought by MNCs that are increasingly becoming 
powerful both economically and politically (Nkrumah, 1965), (Amin, 2014). Third, 
the resource curse theory emphasises that slow growth rates in mineral-rich countries 
are due to mineral price fluctuations (during boom and bust periods) while 
overlooking other important factors that causes fiscal instability such as high interests 
payments on foreign debts, trade sanctions and short-term capital flows. (Desker et al, 
2008).  
 
In addition, existing literature on mineral abundance and resource curse does not 
adequately address questions of how to manipulate state institutions towards resource-
based development (Rosser, 2006), (Campbell, 2010). The creation of production 
linkages through coordination and collaboration of industrial policies cannot be 
overemphasised. In this context, this study fills the important gap in literature in how 
the state intervenes using industrial policy, state capacity and political incentives for 
actors to commit to national vision of aligning mineral policies with long-term 
economic development goals. 
 
2.5. Conclusion 
 
Be that as it may, it is clear that the process of achieving growth and economic 
development is dynamic and complex and it also involves prioritising which sectors to 
develop first that have higher linkages, with the strategic implementation of an 
industrial policy. The idea of resource-based strategy in Zimbabwe should be 
informed by the linkages theory. The mineral sector is important because it is a higher 
linkage sector that can be optimised to achieve economic recovery and sustainable 
growth. Unlike the neoclassical approach that focuses on fundamentals across the 
entire economy, the linkages theory acknowledges that growth is uneven or 
unbalanced and thus involves making priorities to meet specific developmental goals.  
	
  
	
  
	
  
	
  
	
  
 
	
   16 
Chapter 3. The political economy perspective for leveraging the 
mineral sector 
 
Introduction  
 
While the above accounts on resource abundance and the Dutch disease offer 
plausible explanations to slow economic development in resource-rich countries, 
neither alone provides a satisfactory account of the entrenchment of natural resource 
dependence in developing countries. The literature overlooks the importance of 
different political, economic, and institutional legacies in colonised developing 
countries in general and Africa in particular that explain their slow rate of economic 
development. This study moves beyond the resource curse literature that emphasise 
anti-corruption, abolishment of rent-seeking behaviour, good governance, and 
institutional reforms (Collier, (2008). Mineral resource abundance interacts with 
several salient structural and institutional factors in shaping actors’ incentives, 
entailing different policy choices that ultimately produce different economic 
outcomes in Zimbabwe. The following sections of this chapter provide an analysis of 
linkages creation in the mineral sector from a political economy perspective.  
	
  
3.1. The linkages theory 
 
This literature review on linkages provides an analysis to debunk the resource curse 
theory by arguing that the establishment of economic linkages are key to long-term 
economic diversification and development. This linkages theory provides an 
understanding of the necessary conditions under which resource-based development 
(and resource-abundant countries) eludes the curse. The idea of linkages was first 
coined by Albert Hirschman who identified three different types of linkages, which 
are: fiscal, consumptive, and production linkages (Morris, Kaplinsky & Kaplan, 
2012). According to Hirschman, fiscal linkages consist of resource rents from taxes 
and royalties, consumption linkages refer to the demand for the products from other 
sectors due to income rise in the commodities sector; and production linkages, which 
consist of forward and backward linkages (Jourdan, 2012), (Morris, Kaplinsky & 
Kaplan, 2012). The African Union in 2009 also adopted “The African Mining Vision” 
(AMV) that asserts the strategic mineral development and broad-based growth 
	
   17 
facilitated by the creation of economic linkages. The AMV places mining in the 
context of broader development plans by emphasising the integration of mineral 
policy into development policy not only at local levels but also at national and 
regional levels (UNECA, 2011:113). The document also alludes to the importance of 
beneficiation and value addition of mineral resources to reach industrialisation stage 
that ultimately leads to sustainable growth. Figure. 2 below shows the economic 
linkages. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Establishing the resource linkages. 
 
 
 
Mining:	
  Concentration,	
  
smelting,	
  refining	
  =>	
  metal/alloy
Forward	
  Linkages:
Intermediate	
  products	
  =>
Manufacturing;	
  Logistics	
  ;	
  
other	
  sectors	
  (agriculture	
  ,	
  
forestry,	
  fisheries,	
  etc.)
Backward	
  
Linkages
Inputs:
Capital	
  goods
Consumables
Services
Knowledge	
  Linkages
HRD:	
  skills	
  formation
R&D:	
  tech	
  development
Geo-­‐knowledge	
  (survey)
Spatial	
  Linkages:
Infrastructure	
  (transport,	
  
power,	
  ICT)	
  and	
  LED
Fiscal	
  linkages:
Resource	
  rent	
  capture	
  (RRT)	
  &	
  
deployment:	
  long-­‐term	
  human	
  
&	
  physical	
  infrastructure	
  
development
 
 
Source: Jourdan, 2012. 
 
 
 
The figure above shows the five types of linkages that can be created in the mineral 
sector. Jourdan (2012), extending on the work of Hirschman (1981) observed that 
horizontal or side-stream linkages namely, knowledge and spatial are critical for 
insuring the development of other sectors and establishing cross-sector linkages that 
support economic diversification. Thus, side-stream linkages can be understood as 
support structures and industries that lay the foundation for the effectiveness and 
competitiveness of the mining industry. The following section looks at the 
composition of the aforementioned types of linkages. 
 
	
   18 
I. Fiscal linkages – includes rents capture through Resource Rents Tax (RRT). 
These rents could be either direct (RRT, corporate tax) or indirect tax 
(royalties, export tax, etc) (UNECA & AU, 2011).  The resource rents can be 
used to promote industrial development in other sectors, that is reinvestment in 
domestic production and physical infrastructure development but can also be 
invested in funds such as Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF). 
 
II. Backward/Upstream linkages – include the supply sector or inputs sector that 
feed into the mineral sector such as mining capital goods, consumables and 
service industries. (UNECA & AU, 2011), (Jourdan, 2012). 
 
III. Forward/Downstream linkages – includes mineral value addition in industries 
(beneficiation) through processing and refining, and even using minerals as 
inputs for local industries.  
 
IV. Knowledge linkages – consists of the development of human capital (for 
example, engineers, geologists) and technology development through 
Research & Development (R&D), universities and technical institutions. 
(Jourdan, 2012).  
 
V. Spatial linkages – include transport (roads, rail), water and energy 
infrastructure. It is argued that the mining sector depends and facilitates 
massive infrastructural systems that are significant for the development of 
other sectors such as agriculture and forestry (Jourdan, 2012), (UNECA & 
AU, 2011). 
 
The interplay and the articulation of these various linkages will promote and support 
productive capacities that are significant for long-term economic growth and 
recovery. 
	
  
3.2. Building Linkages and promoting diversification 
 
According to Humphreys, Sachs and Stiglitz, (2007), natural resource wealth is 
‘enclaved’ wealth because firstly, “the generation of natural resource wealth can occur 
	
   19 
quite independently of other economic processes that take place in a country; … 
[Secondly], … natural resources … are non-renewable. …they are thus less like a 
source of income and more like an asset”. (Humphreys, Sachs, and Stiglitz, (2007:4).  
 
The fact that natural resources are extracted, which is not a result of ‘production 
process’ per se means that there are less economic linkages with other productive 
sectors. Because of this unique nature of natural resources this study finds it necessary 
to analyse the idea of linkages creation to ensure that the economy continues to 
function when the resources are exhausted.  
 
3.2.1. Beneficiation and value addition of the mineral resources 
 
Despite the diversity of the mineral resource base in Zimbabwe, the contribution of 
the sector to broad-based economic development is limited by lack of downstream 
linkages and the value addition of mineral resources. Beneficiation is a downstream 
process of transforming raw minerals to a higher value semi-finished or finished 
product which can be exported or consumed locally (SIMS report, 2012). Value 
addition involves the process of enhancing the quality of the product. In general, 
beneficiation and value addition not only increase and stabilize the export value of 
mineral commodities, but also have a positive multiplier effect on the macro-
economy.  
 
This happens through employment creation, knowledge and capacity building in both 
upstream and downstream industries, industrialization and diversification of the 
economy  (UNECA, 2011), (Jourdan, 2012). Beneficiation is also critical in 
developing downwards linkages promoted by comparative advantage. The articulation 
of mining licence to include different beneficiation and value addition targets is 
evidence that countries are serious about creating linkages in the extractive industries 
as well as ensuring that the operations of private mining companies are aligned to 
national development interests. (UNECA, 2011). Horizontal linkages transform the 
process of production by linking up the mineral sector in facilitating the build-up of 
sound infrastructure and energy supply which are the pillars to long term economic 
development (Toledano et al, 2014),  (UNECA, 2011). Zimbabwe must create 
effective linkages so that the minerals extracted become feedstocks to the production 
	
   20 
sectors like agriculture and the manufacturing. These linkages can be created through 
an industrial policy for the mining industry that is designed to suit the context, 
expectations, and capabilities of the country (UNECA, 2011).  
 
Beneficiation and value addition of minerals can also be analysed from the Global 
Value Chains (GVC) framework. The concept of GVC is tied to the World Bank 
discourse of export-led growth literature on the East Asian Miracle. The concept is 
premised on upgrading of the product by firms to improve technological efficiency 
and the quality of the final product. Thus, the GVC framework aims to upgrade 
product development throughout inter-sectoral upgrading and to improve access to 
global markets through design, marketing and branding of the product (Kaplinsky, 
(2010). The insertion of GVC into product development allows for the process of 
beneficiation and value addition to take place in mining industry and in other sectors. 
However, global value chains do not always result in upgrading. Multinational 
companies with economic power have no incentive to transfer upgrading skills to their 
supplier thereby restricting them from accessing global markets. The OECD (2014) 
report also noted that small developing countries face the challenge of ‘being locked 
in into low value-added stages of GVCs’ and ‘foreign investors operating in isolation 
with only limited spill overs to the domestic economy.’ Therefore, the important take 
away from the GVC analysis in connection with beneficiation and value addition is to 
place more emphasise on firms’ participation in national and regional value chains to 
establish strong trade linkages and structure before they enter global markets (OECD, 
2014). 
 
3.3. Industrial policy: The role of the state 
 
Industrial policy is a national strategy to reform the industrial structure of the country 
for achieving national developmental objectives and it is aligned with the country’s 
trade policy (Chang, 1998). Chang (1994: 60) defines industrial policy as policy 
aimed at specific industries to achieve positive performance and outcomes that are 
perceived as efficient by the state. Industrial policy clearly defines the role of the state 
that is beyond the facilitatory role to redistribute resources, giving fiscal incentives, 
setting targets and implementing coordinated policy measures (Chang, 1994). The 
literature on industrial policy identifies three categories of industrial policies: vertical 
	
   21 
policies that target specific sectors, horizontal policies that influence each industry 
and structural policies which aim to promote a structural change in the economic 
activity (Fine, 1997). 
  
The rational behind industrial policy is that markets alone cannot address the 
developmental needs and economic gaps within a nation hence the need for the state 
to play a facilitatory role in stimulating economic growth as argued by Amsden, 
(1994) in her studies of the East Asian economies. She contends that “market forces 
cannot be relied upon to discipline business to act efficiently” (as cited by Tan Kock, 
in Fitzgerald, 1995:38). The argument is that, the state and market are intertwined; the 
markets provide natural economic incentives (that are arguably based on 
competitiveness), while the state will set the playing field, give incentives and provide 
regulatory frameworks through various forms of industrial policy. However, Evans 
(2012) argues that such a state should have an ‘embedded autonomy’ to successfully 
stimulate economic growth through industrial transformation and not to be 
manipulated by powerful rent-seeking elites. By ‘embedded autonomy’, he refers to 
the structure of the state and its relationship with the society. In addition, the 
implementation of the industrial policy is also important in optimising the mineral 
sector. This requires strategic policy coherence with other economic sectors and 
coordination of various departments and key institutions to effectively establish 
linkages and economic diversification.  
 
Mainstream neo-liberal economists view industrial policy as an undesirable policy 
option because of government interference in the economy. They argue that 
government intervention of ‘picking the industrial winners’ does not guarantee 
industrial success since there is no substantive criteria that determine which industries 
are more competitive than others. They contend that the role of the government 
should be limited to the establishment of laws and regulation for market operations to 
effectively take place. Active government intervention is seen as disruptive leading to 
inefficiency in resource allocation and disequilibrium prices (Chang, (1994). There is 
also a general view that foreign investors, like donors as well as international 
organisations such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) are 
ideologically opposed to the idea of economic linkages formation as these fall under 
industrial policy and government intervention which therefore distort market oriented 
	
   22 
macroeconomic frameworks. Buur et al. (2013) therefore observed that “it is a 
characteristic of the World Bank’s approach that the linkage issue is not given much 
attention in its advice and recommendations, possibly due to its aversion to industrial 
policy”. 
 
The debate on industrial policy is also controversial with different authors rhetorically 
emphasising different strands on how industrial policy should be articulated. Lin 
(2011b) narrows industrial policy by arguing that it should be aligned with the 
comparative advantage and current endowment of a country. Chang (2003) contend 
that industrial policy should be selective. A selective intervention strategy of 
industrial policy is important but the question remains whether the government is 
capable of ‘picking winners’, or do these selected sectors guarantee economic growth 
and development (Fine & Rustomjee, 1998:253). The debate on industrial policy has 
also been tied to the literature on developmental state that emphasises the political 
legitimacy and capacity of the state to actively intervene in directing the economy 
(Fine, 2010b) (Lin, 2011b). The major critic coming from the debate is that industrial 
policy has been used to fix what is already there and not necessarily to transform the 
structure of the economy.  Cassim, (2006) and Fine, (2010b) argue that the use of 
industrial policy has not provided a break away from original capitalist economic 
structure. Rather, it has to some extend strengthened and perpetuated the existing 
colonial structure of most industries like mining, manufacturing and financial sectors. 
In South Africa for example, Cassim, (2006) argues that the implementation of 
industrial policy has often reinforced the existing economic structure and growth 
through provisions of state-backed funding for capital-intensive mining and 
manufacturing sectors. Hence, it is imperative for Zimbabwe to implement industrial 
policy to strategically transform the economy, achieve economic recovery and 
sustainable growth. 
	
  
 
3.4. Shifting from mineral resource dependence to industrialisation 
 
Zimbabwe is not industrialised relative to western countries and hence it is necessary 
to analyse the role of minerals in structural transformation and industrialisation. 
Beneficiation of mineral commodities is regarded as a viable path to industrialisation 
(Kalinsky, 2011). Industrialisation process can be understood as a production stage in 
	
   23 
which countries shift their production systems from agrarian system to industrial 
economies that are characterised by use of advanced machinery, technological 
innovations. Lewis (1953) understood industrialisation as a production stage that is 
necessary for sustainable economic development and industrial diversification. Many 
developed states, between the period of 1940s and 1960s managed to develop their 
economies by actively pioneering and facilitating the emergence of industrialisation 
(Kiely, 1999:32). Kaldor (1978) sees the manufacturing sector is a key 
characterisation of industrialisation. He argues that manufacturing sector is an engine 
of growth and industrialisation in terms of absorbing labour, (both skilled and 
unskilled), skills creation through ‘learning by doing’, strong backward and forward 
linkages with other sectors and facilitating technological innovations. Kaldor’s work 
also provides similar insights with Hirschman regarding linkages creation. Both 
Kaldor and Hirschman share the same view that manufacturing sector has greater 
forward and backward effects than other sectors of the economy, and argue that 
forward linkages offer potential contribution to industrialisation in the manufacturing 
sector. Thus, mining activities have the potential for creating forward and backward 
linkages with the manufacturing sector through beneficiation of mineral resources 
(Morris, Kaplinsky & Kaplan, 2010). 
 
Studies also show that comparative advantage plays an important role of shifting 
economies from natural resource dependency to industrialisation. Ricardo coined the 
idea of comparative advantage in his attempt to explain trade theory. Trade theory 
rests on the assumption that each country has a comparative advantage in trade in 
relation to the rest of the world, and trade liberalisation and openness will allow 
specialisation in comparative advantage to take place. The Ricardian model of 
comparative advantage argues that countries will gain by specialising in the 
production of goods, which use their most abundant factor of production 
(Deraniyagala and Fine, 2001). The model is premised on the assumption that through 
trade liberalisation and openness, countries are able to generate positive growth 
results due to ‘static gains that arise from resource allocation by following 
comparative advantage. This assumption is based on the mainstream neo-classical 
idea of market perfection.  
 
	
   24 
The adoption of new technologies is crucial in turning a country’s comparative 
advantage into a competitive advantage such as new skills, technological information 
and lower inputs costs.  During the industrial revolution technological innovations of 
advanced machinery greased the wheels of industrialisation by promoting innovation 
and increasing production efficiency particularly in manufacturing sector. Foreign 
Direct Investments and (MNCs) are global actors that facilitate technology transfer 
within countries, as witnessed by the East Asian economies although these countries 
were selective on the type of FDI. (Morris, Kaplinsky & Kaplan, (2010). Therefore, in 
order to steer industrialisation process, linkages creation in the mineral industry 
should allow for a conducive environment for innovation and technology transfer to 
take place, for example, adopting public policy that integrates the private sector in 
development objectives. Also, the availability of information and knowledge in the 
contemporary world could mean that industrialisation and the overall economic 
development can be achieved in a more efficient and sustainable ways in contrast to 
earlier industrialisation of the West that was mainly based on destruction and plunder 
of resources. 
	
  
3.5. Conclusion. 
	
  
Since mineral resources are finite (Jourdan, 2012) (Barma et al, 2012), it is crucial for 
Zimbabwe to optimise the resource wealth through the creation of economic linkages 
to resuscitate its economy and to attain long-term growth and economic development. 
As noted by Morris et al (2012), the industrial growth of the United States, Finland, 
Norway, and Australia was pioneered by commodity production that operated as a 
stepping-stone towards diversification and industrialisation. This suggests that mining 
can be a catalyst for broad-based economic development through promoting  
‘upstream’ and ‘downstream’ linkages as well as knowledge and spatial linkages.  
However, the successful development of the minerals sector as a platform for 
economic recovery in Zimbabwe also depends on economic and political institutions, 
policy coordination, and the capacity of the government to implement an industrial 
policy that promotes beneficiation and industrial diversification. 
 
 
 
	
   25 
Chapter 4. Policy Environment and the Political Economy Dynamics 
 
Introduction. 
 
This chapter discusses the institutional and ideological context within which the 
policy space for mineral resource extraction and linkages development is designed. 
This involves looking at policy frameworks and the political context in Zimbabwe, 
and how that impacts mineral development and linkages creation. Various policy 
measures, and legislation have been introduced in the mining sector as government 
attempts to turn the sector into a springboard to economic recovery. The other section 
of the chapter discusses the political dynamics that effect and influence stakeholder’s 
or actor’s actions in addressing national development goals. 
 
4.1. Government initiatives: policy instruments 
 
As mentioned earlier, the discovery of diamonds deposits, the rise of PGM mining as 
well as the need by the government to rise additional budgetary funds from mineral 
exports following the collapse of the economy forced the Zimbabwean government to 
undertake different policy initiatives. Various policy initiatives to turn the mining 
sector into a cornerstone for economic recovery have been undertaken including 
regional and national initiatives although the latter is given more p