Can Capitalists Afford Recovery? Three Views on Economic Policy in Times of Crisis (Reprint)

Philosophers for ChangeCan capitalists afford recovery? Three views on economicpolicy in times of crisisNovember 18, 2014by Jonathan Nian and Shimshon BichlerEconomic, financial and social commentators from all directions and of various persuasions areobsessed with the prospect of recovery. The world remains mired in a deep, prolonged crisis, and thekey question seems to be how to get out of it. The purpose of our paper is to ask a very differentquestion that few if any seem concerned with: can capitalists afford recovery in the first place?[1]Our starting point is very different from the conventional creed, both mainstream and heterodox(Nian and Bichler 2009a; Bichler and Nian 2012b). Liberals and Marxists see capital as an economicentity and capitalism as a mode of production and consumption, so for them, the accumulation crisisis anchored in the economics of production and consumption. By contrast, we see capital as asymbolic representation of power and capitalism as a mode of power, so for us, the crisis ofaccumulation is a crisis of capitalized power. Furthermore, whereas the economic viewpoint,particularly the Marxist, sees the current crisis as the symptom and culmination of a long process ofweakening accumulation, for us it is the consequence of capital having reached unprecedentedstrength (Bichler and Nian 2008, 2009; Nian and Bichler 2009b; Bichler and Nian 2010; Kliman,Bichler, and Nian 2011).According to our research, the accumulation of capital-read-power might be approaching itsasymptotes, or limits (Bichler and Nian 2012a). The closer capitalized power is to its asymptotes, themore difficult it is to augment it further. Capitalists, though, have no choice. They are conditioned andcompelled to increase their capitalized power without end, and that relentless drive breeds conflict. Itforces capitalists to increase their threats, escalate their sabotage and intensify their use of force – andthis intensification is in turn bound to trigger stronger resistance, contestations, uprisings and more.By the early 2000s, capitalists began to realize the unfolding of this asymptotic scenario. They startedto sense that their power is nearing its limits and that accumulation is becoming ever more difficult toachieve and might be reversed. And given that capitalization is forward-looking, the result has been amajor bear market. Measured in constant dollars, stock prices are still below their peak levels of fifteenyears ago: in August 2014, the Datastream World Index was still 2 per cent shy of its 1999 level, whilethe U.S. S&P 500 was 14 per cent lower.The present paper contextualizes and examines this process from the viewpoint of economic policy.Thematically, the analysis is divided into three parts. The first part deals with the mainstreammacroeconomic perspective. This approach claims to have already solved the key theoretical riddles,so the main emphasis here is on the practical question of how to engineer a recovery. The answer tothis question, though, remains elusive. The recent crisis has undermined the self-confidence ofpolicymakers: they are no longer certain of their theoretical models, they mistrust their policy-tools,and they feel increasingly short on policy ammunition. The second part examines the Marxist view.Marxists stress the inherent contradictions of accumulation, so the question for them is the verypossibility of sustained growth. This approach offers very important insights, but its application tocontemporary capitalism is hampered by conceptual quandaries and empirical inconsistencies.Mainstream and Marxist economics obviously are very different from each other in framework andgoals. Nonetheless, they share a common premise: they both consider capitalism a mode ofproduction and consumption. From this common viewpoint, crises, although sometimes trigged andfurther complicated by financial, political and societal factors, are ultimately about the ‘real economy’.The third and final part challenges this common premise by taking the view that capital is not a ‘real’productive entity but commodified power, and that capitalism is not a mode of production andconsumption but a mode of power. Capitalized power, we argue, hinges not on growth, but onstrategic sabotage. So from this viewpoint, the key question to ask is not how capitalists can achieveand sustain a recovery, but whether they can afford it to start with. Our answer to this question isnegative, at least for the United States. We show that, contrary to popular conviction, over the pastcentury the U.S. capitalist income share-read-power thrived not on prosperity and the growth ofemployment but on crisis and rising unemployment. U.S. policymakers therefore are locked into aconceptual and practical corner: if they act on their conventional belief and boost the capitalist incomeshare to trigger economic growth, they would achieve the very opposite result; and if they manage torekindle growth, they would end up undermining the accumulation-read-power of capitalists.Mainstream MacroeconomicsThe stock market crash of 2008 and the ensuing Great Recession heighted the systemic fear of theruling class – the sense that capitalism itself might be in danger and that they, the rulers, might belosing their grip over the situation (Bichler and Nian 2010; Kliman, Bichler, and Nian 2011). Thequotes in Box 1 suggest that this fear continues unabated. In 2008, former Fed Chairperson AlanGreenspan spoke of himself and his like being in a state of ‘shocked disbelief’ after their ‘wholeintellectual edifice’ had collapsed, while journalist Gillian Te of the Financial Times described a senseof total confusion, as capitalists, policymakers and smaller investors realized that their ‘intellectualcompass’ had been broken. The next five years have done lile to ease this systemic fear. In 2013,central bankers admied quite openly that they have no clue as to what is going on – or, in their ownwords, that they are in ‘uncharted territory’ which they do not ‘fully understand’, and that they are‘flying blind when steering their economies’. In that same year, Lawrence Summers, a formerTreasury Secretary and until recently a keen promoter of neoliberalism, wondered whether stagnationmight prove to be the ‘new normal’, while in 2014, Nobel Laureate Edmund Phelps, an unrelentingproponent of free markets, conjured up the spectre of ‘regulation’ and ‘corporatist values’ to explainwhy, despite neoliberalism, capitalism has lost its ‘past dynamism’.Box 1Systemic FearAlan Greenspan:The whole intellectual edifice . . . collapsed in the summer of last year. . . . [T]hose of us who havelooked to the self-interest of lending institutions to protect shareholder’s equity (myself especially) arein a state of shocked disbelief. Such counterparty surveillance is a central pillar of our financialmarkets’ state of balance. If it fails, as occurred this year, market stability is undermined (Andrews2008; U.S. Congress 2008, emphases added).Financial Times Editorial:Uncertainty is the only certain thing in this crisis. . . . a dense fog of confusion has . . . descended,obscuring where we are – falling fast, slowly, bumping along the boom, or finally turning thecorner. . . . Economies are behaving unpredictably and will continue to do so. The instability is bothcause and consequence of the great uncertainty that has been spreading out from the financialmarkets. Fearful and confused, people react erratically to changing news, reinforcing confused marketbehaviour. It doesn’t help that our economic theories were constructed for a different world. Mostmodels depict economies close to equilibrium. . . . And unlike what most models assume, prices arenot properly clearing all markets. . . . (Editors 2009, emphasis added).Gillian Te:[T]he pillars of faith on which this new financial capitalism were built have all but collapsed, and thatcollapse has left everyone from finance minister or central banker to small investor or pension holderbereft of an intellectual compass, dazed and confused (Te 2009, emphasis added).Chris Giles:[Some] of the leading figures in central banking conceded they were flying blind when steering theireconomies. Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, the former member of the European Central Bank’s executive board,captured the mood at the IMF’s spring meeting, saying: ‘We don’t fully understand what ishappening in advanced economies’. In this environment of uncertainty about the way economieswork and how to influence recoveries with policy, Sir Mervyn King, the outgoing governor of theBank of England, said that ‘there is the risk of appearing to promise too much or allowing too much tobe expected of us’. . . . The central bankers were clear that they had got it wrong before the crisis,allowing themselves to be lulled, by stable inflation, into thinking they had eliminated financialvulnerabilities. . . . The question now was whether central bankers are making the same mistake intheir efforts to secure a recovery. Might they be storing up financial distortions that will bite in thefuture?. . . . ‘Put simply, we are in uncharted territory’, said [vice chairman of the Federal Reserve]Mr Viñals. . . . The problem outlined by Sir Mervyn was that the uncertainty is so pervasive that noone can be sure that the expansionary monetary policy is appropriate in a world where nations arelearning they are poorer than they expected, but are not sure by how much. How can we be sure ‘wereally are [not] running the risk of reigniting the problems that led to the financial crisis in the firstplace?’ Mr Bean asked the IMF panel (Giles 2013, emphases added).Lawrence Summers:Why stagnation might prove to be the new normal: In the past decade, before the crisis, bubbles andloose credit were only sufficient to drive moderate growth. . . . Is it possible that the US and othermajor global economies might not return to full employment and strong growth without the helpof unconventional policy support?. . . . [T]he presumption that normal economic and policyconditions will return at some point cannot be maintained (Summers 2013, emphases added).Edmund Phelps:Lethargic growth, widespread job dissatisfaction and staggering debt – such is life in a western worldthat seems to have lost the habit of innovation that energised it for more than a century. . . . It is urgentthat these nations find a way back to their past dynamism. . . . The blame for the losses of innovationbehind slowdowns in productivity lies with the spread of corporatist values, particularly solidarity,security and stability. Politicians have introduced regulation that stifles competition; patronisedinterest groups through pork-barrel contracts; and lent direction to the economy through industrialpolicy. In the process they have impeded those who would innovate or reduce their incentives to try(Phelps 2014, emphasis added).The Great SlideWhat underpins this systemic fear? Why does the ruling class feel ‘bereft of an intellectual compass’?Why do policymakers admit that they are ‘flying blind’? Why do the ideologues of neoliberalismresign themselves to the ‘new normal’ of secular stagnation and lost ‘dynamism’?Figure 1 provides the broad context. The chart is a snapshot of the ‘state of the world economy’ sincethe beginning of the systemic crisis in the early 2000s. The figure shows three annual GDP growthrates: (1) the doed red line is for the advanced countries, (2) the dashed line is for the developingworld, and (3) the solid line is for the world as a whole. We can see the first downturn in 2000-2002.The developing world and emerging markets recovered briskly from this decline, but the advancedcountries showed a very feeble recovery. Then came the 2008-9 drop. This downturn was much moreserious (–5 per cent for the developed world and –3 per cent for the world as a whole), and therecovery from it limited and brief. By 2010, both regions – and the world as whole – began todecelerate rapidly.Policymakers looking at this chart must get the shivers. Despite massive policy intervention –including unorthodox measures that only a few years back would have been considered unthinkable –the world economy has been largely unresponsive. In 2013, the advanced countries showed a modestuptick, but growth soon decelerated, and many now fear the uptick was a ‘dead cat bounce’.The Real/Nominal DichotomyTo understand the gravity of the situation for policymakers, and for the ruling class more broadly, it isuseful to provide some theoretical background. Consider the simple decomposition offered inEquation 1:The equation starts with the total dollar value, or nominal value of GDP (which we call Y). This valueis the product of two components: the quantity of commodities being produced, which economists call‘real’ GDP (denoted as Q in the equation), and the average nominal or dollar price of thosecommodities, which is given by the GDP deflator (and marked by P in the equation).This decomposition, which goes back to David Hume’s classical dichotomy between the ‘real’ and the‘nominal’ spheres of economic life, underlies the national accounts everywhere. We consider thisbifurcation to be deeply problematic, both theoretically and empirically (Nian 1989; Nian andBichler 2009a: Ch. 8). But since most if not all economists, both mainstream and heterodox, seem toaccept the real/nominal duality as an article of faith, and given that we are concerned here with theirviews, not ours, we shall use it in this paper without further qualification.The Keynesian RevolutionUntil the 1930s, the conventional liberal dogma was that government intervention was unnecessaryand harmful: it was unnecessary because the market mechanism was self-correcting, which, in today’slingo, means that real GDP tends to oscillate near its optimal, full-employment value to begin with;and it was harmful because it led to distortions, misallocation and undue inflation or deflation. Now,although the pre-1930s economists did not think in explicitly macroeconomic terms, we can useEquation 1 to translate their argument into contemporary jargon. In a nutshell, their claim was thatgovernment intervention cannot raise real GDP (Q), which is already at its maximal level (although itcertainly can lower it). This inability means that any intervention can only inflate or deflate nominalGDP (Y) by raising or lowering prices (P). Parenthetically, we should add here that this view was alsoshared by Marx, who thought that a large state would undermine accumulation by taxing away partof the surplus value (Baran and Sweezy 1966: 142-143).The crisis of the 1930s shaered this belief. A large chunk of the labour force was unemployed,productive capacity was lying idle and the invisible hand did nothing to put them back to work. Thismuch was obvious to anyone who could see. But the economists could see only through their theory,and that theory asserted that persistent unemployment was impossible.And that is where Keynes came into the picture. His great achievement was to persuade economists(1) that the real economy can get stuck at less than full employment; and (2) that, in terms of Equation1, the government can remedy the situation because it can impact not only the nominal price level (P),but also the real level of output (Q).Keynes identified two key problems, both anchored in base instincts. The first problem was amismatch of investment and savings. As society grows richer, he argued, the propensity to investdeclines while the propensity to save rises. And since saving and investment decisions are made bydifferent agents, the result of this mismatch is ‘deficient demand’ and a tendency for stagnation andunemployment. The second problem was that investment decisions are governed by the highly erraticand largely unpredictable ‘animal spirits’ of investors, which make capitalism inherently unstable.Now, given that capitalism tends to stagnation and instability, and given that the government canaffect the real economy as well as prices, it made sense for governments to intervene in order to savecapitalists – and capitalism more generally – from their own folly.The Keynesian RecordThe historical record seems to confirm this view. Figure 2 shows the U.S. rate of unemployment andGDP growth since the late 1880s. Unemployment is ploed against the right-hand scale and GDPgrowth against the left-hand scale. The data are divided into two sub-periods: until 1946 and from1946 onward.To explain what we have done here, consider the rate of unemployment. We have taken the perioduntil 1946, and for this period we have computed the series mean and standard deviation. The topdashed red line is equal to the mean of the series plus one standard deviation (which, in this case,adds up to 11.4 per cent), while the boom dashed line is equal to the mean minus one standarddeviation (2.4 per cent). According to the statisticians, the 9 per cent range between these two lines,equivalent to two standard deviations, should contain roughly two thirds of the squared variation ofthe unemployment rate during 1886-1946 and therefore gives us a rough sense of the series’ volatilityin that period. The same procedure has been applied to the period from 1946 onwards, and, as we cansee, the volatility here is almost three times smaller: the top dashed line is at 7.4 per cent while theboom one is at 4.1 per cent, yielding a range of only 3.3 per cent. The same calculations are shown forthe GDP growth series, and here, too, we can see a marked decline in volatility between the twoperiods.This record, which is probably representative of what happened in other countries, seems prey clear.The data serve to explain why, during the early 1970s, both Milton Friedman and Richard Nixonproclaimed that ‘we are all Keynesian now’.[2] Governments seem to have learnt how to ‘manage’their economies. Not only have they prevented a repeat of the Great Depression, they have alsosignificantly reduced the instability that radical political economists had predicted would shaercapitalism.The Monetarist Counter-RevolutionBut that was also the problem. The success of Keynesian ‘demand management’ meant that capitalistswere no longer in the driver’s seat. If they misbehaved – either by not investing enough or by actingerratically – governments could step in and fix things up. Worst still, Keynesian policymaking couldbe pied against the capitalists, particularly through higher corporate tax rates and progressivepersonal taxation. This is exactly what happened in the United States after the Second World War,with the result being that the national income share of corporations stagnated and the distribution ofpersonal income became more equal.In short, Keynes had to be undone, and this is where Milton Friedman and his monetarist counter-revolution came into the picture. Monetarism – and the new-classical macroeconomic theories thatdeveloped in its wake – claims that the pre-1930s neoclassicists had it right all along. There were onlytwo lile things missing from their framework: (1) the natural rate of unemployment and (2)expectations.The natural rate of unemployment is like the Emperor’s New Clothes: only the monetarists and the new-classicists can see it. For the old, pre-1930s economists, the basic rule was ‘what you see is what youget’. If the statistics said that unemployment was zero or oscillating close to zero, then the economymust be functioning as well as it should. Alternatively, if the statistics said that unemployment wasstuck at over 20 per cent – as was the case during the Great Depression – then the theory, whichpredicted that unemployment should quickly decline, must be wrong.Not so for the monetarists and new-classical economists. Appearances can be very deceiving, theywarn us; particularly if you are unversed in new-classical monetarism. But those who can see theemperor’s new clothes know beer. They know that, in fact, most unemployment is notunemployment at all. It consists of people looking for beer jobs, people upgrading their skills, orpeople who are temporarily caught in the friction of blessed technical change. This unemployment –whose precise magnitude can change with circumstances – is part and parcel of a vibrant, ever-changing capitalism. It is natural and therefore desirable; and things that are natural and desirableshould not be messed with by government.[3]Government policy can reduce unemployment below its natural rate – but only by cheating. In termsof Equation 1, the monetarist position is that, if economic agents have full information and actrationally, the government can only affect prices (P). It cannot affect the real economy (Q).Unfortunately, though, information is not always fully available and agents sometimes act irrationally,so there is always the temptation for government to try to fool them in order to reduce theirunemployment below its natural rate.The ‘efficacy of fooling’ (our term) depends on expectations. In Friedman’s naïve version (1968b,1977), expectations adapt only slowly, so unemployment can be reduced below its natural rate for acertain period – although there is always a price to pay. Eventually, agents smarten up; and when theydo, Equation 1 ascertains that the entire policy boost (through a higher Y) ends up raising prices (P).In later versions, such as those of Robert Lucas (1972; 1973; 1978) and Thomas Sargent (1973),expectations are rational, so expansionary policy cannot affect the real economy (Q) even in the shortrun and is immediately translated into higher inflation (by raising P). A more recent instalment of thislogic, issued by Edward Presco and Finn Kydland (1982), suggests that the entire business cycle is anatural, supply-side process and therefore impervious to Keynesian demand policy to start with.Friedman, Phelps, Lucas, Sargent, Kydland and Presco all won Nobel Memorial Prizes, and for agood reason: they managed to undo Keynes. They created a new dogma that states not only thatmacroeconomic policy cannot affect the real economy, but, more importantly, that the real economydoes not need to be affected in the first place. In their laissez faire economy, the rate of unemploymentwill sele at its natural rate, whether it is 6, 8 or 20 per cent. The only thing the government should dois keep prices stable over the longer haul, by leing the money supply grow at the same rate as thelong-term growth of the real economy.This was the dogma in 2008.And then came the stock market crash and the Great Recession. Protected by academic tenure andheavy subsidization, the economics profession has remained largely unfazed, but the policymakershave panicked, in unison. Within a few years, they have lost all confidence in their own dogma.Instead of siing tight and leing the market ‘fix itself’, they have ‘intervened’, massively, breakingalmost every rule in their book.Fiscal PolicyOn the fiscal side, policymakers have let budget deficits skyrocket. Figure 3 shows the budget balancein the OECD countries, with positive numbers indicating a surplus and negative numbers showing adeficit. We can see that, since the early 1990s, with monetarist neoliberalism in full swing, deficitstended to shrink, and that in some countries they reverted to small surpluses. But the first crash of themillennium, in 2000, reversed that trend, and in 2008, it was as if all hell had broken loose. Theaverage OECD government deficit rose to nearly 8 per cent of GDP, and in the U.S., the bastion ofneoliberalism, the deficit reached 12 per cent.Of course, this was not exactly a return to Keynesianism, with its emphasis on planning through hightaxes and even higher spending (on the rise and decline of ‘Keynesianism’ in the current crisis, seeFarrell and Quiggin 2012). Instead, it was a quick-and-dirty, ‘hands-off intervention’, based mostly ontax cuts and automatic stabilizers. And as we can see, it was hastily reversed. In the early 2010s,policymakers started to talk about ‘austerity’, ‘belt tightening’ and ‘fiscal cliffs’. And their U-Turncame not because their economies were finally booming or because the economists had come up withsome new theoretical insight, but because of the public debt.Figure 4 shows the ratio of government debt to GDP in the OECD. With deficits soaring and GDPstagnating, governments had to borrow massively, causing the debt/GDP ratio to rise by nearly 50 percent in only 5 years! And with the ratio currently exceeding 110 per cent – up from 40 per cent in the1970s – policymakers now warn us they are running out of fiscal ammunition.[4]Monetary PolicyThe situation with monetary policy looks equally demoralizing. Until 2008, the monetarist mantraspoke about fixed ‘policy rules’ that central bankers should obey. In 2008, these rules were thrown outof the window. Instead of leing the money supply grow at the same rate as the so-called realeconomy, central banks embarked on what they called ‘quantitative easing’. Or, in simpler words,they began to print money, and in large quantities.This process is shown in Figure 5. The graph plots the monetary base – which measures the amount ofnotes and coins in circulation – in the United States, the European Union and Japan. The numbers aredenominated in local currencies and normalized to January 2008=100 so they can be compared easily.The watershed is 2008. Before 2008, the expansion of the money supply was relatively orderly,particularly in the European Union and the United States. This paern changed drastically after thecrash, with the United States leading the way. Since 2008, the U.S. Fed has nearly quintupled themoney supply. The European Central Bank quickly followed – though compared to the American‘bull in a china store’, it trod carefully, choosing fine-tuning over indiscriminate printing. TheJapanese, who were first to toy with this policy in the early 2000s, are only now re-joining thebandwagon: in early 2013 they announced plans to double their monetary base in two years, a targetthey are soon to achieve.This massive money printing is remarkable primarily because it seems to have had lile or no effect,nominal or real. Begin with the nominal side. From a Keynesian perspective, the deep crisis of 2008-9,should have produced deflation, while, from a monetarist viewpoint, the massive quantitative easingshould have generated hyperinflation. Yet neither of these outcomes has materialized. Over the pastdecade, core inflation in the developed countries – that is, inflation excluding changes in food andenergy prices – has remained remarkably stable at around 1-2 per cent.[5]And the picture is equally embarrassing on the real side. Keynesians had hoped that making moneycheaper would boost investment and kick-start the economy. However, that hasn’t happened. Sincethe beginning of the crisis, green-field investment as a share of GDP in the OECD countries hasplummeted to its lowest level in 50 years: this share stood at 25 per cent in the early 1970s; it fell to 21per cent in 2007 and it currently stands on 18 per cent (World Bank Online).Moreover, looking at Figure 6, it is hard to see why Keynesians should have expected monetary policyto reverse this downtrend. The chart shows long-term government bond yields in the three leadingOECD countries. These rates were already very low when the crisis started, and now, at close to zero,they are lower than at any other time since the 1950s. In this case, printing more money is like‘pushing on a string’, as Keynes reputedly put it. It should have lile or no effect on interest rates andtherefore none on real investment.This brief exposition should make it clear why the ruling class feels bereft of an intellectual compassand why its policymakers admit that they are flying blind when stirring their economies. Their dogmahas collapsed. Not only did they abandon this dogma in a panic when the 2008 crisis struck, but theirmakeshift solutions have failed to generate meaningful results, let alone the expected ones. Moreover,they seem to have run out of ammunition. With massive debt, further fiscal expansion becomesimpossible; and with interest rates close to zero, monetary expansion is useless. Another crisis todaywould find them empty handed.The Marxist PerspectiveFor the Marxists, the key question is not how to bring about a recovery, but whether sustained growthis possible to begin with. According to Marx, the answer to this question is negative. Accumulation forhim is rooted in and generated through class conflict, and this conflict makes capitalism inherentlyunstable, prone to crisis and, eventually, destined for breakdown.Marx himself did not offer a coherent theory of crisis. He did generate, however, several keyprinciples that in his view were crucial for understanding the inherent crisis tendencies of capitalism.These insights later gave rise to a huge Marxist literature on crises, to which we cannot do justice here.Our purpose, rather, is simply to highlight some of Marx’s insights, as well as the difficulties they giverise to. We focus on three theories, which we will examine in turn: (1) the tendency of the rate of profitto fall; (2) the interaction between the reserve army of the unemployed and the real wage; and (3)underconsumption (for critical reviews and overviews of Marxist crisis theories, see, for example,Sweezy 1942: Part III; Wright 1977; Shaikh 1978; Weisskopf 1978, 1991; Laibman 1999-2000; Agnoleo2013).The Tendency of the Rate of Profit to FallProfit for Marx is the source of accumulation. As a class, capitalists can only reinvest what theyappropriate in profit; so if the rate of profit tends to fall, so must the maximum rate at which capitalcan accumulate. Now, according to Marx, and here we come to the first theory, this downwardtendency is built into the very logic of capitalism.To see why this is so, let us review the basic Marxist accounting in Equations 2-8 below. Begin with c,v and s, which are measured in terms of socially necessary abstract labour time. If we denote constantcapital by c, variable capital by v and surplus value by s, we can express the following threerelationships. The organic composition of capital θ is the ratio of c/v; the rate of surplus value ξ is theratio of s/v; and the rate of profit π is the ratio of s/(c+v). If we now divide the numerator anddenominator of the rate of profit by v, we can express the rate of profit π as a ratio between the rate ofsurplus value ξ and the organic composition of capital θ plus 1.[6]This framework, says Marx, enables us to understand one of the key built-in limitations of capitalism.Competition compels profit-maximizing capitalists to constantly mechanize their production, and thisrelentless process causes the organic composition to rise over time. Capitalists are also driven to raisethe rate of surplus value (although it is not entirely clear why, under competitive conditions, theyshould succeed in doing so). In Marx’s opinion – which he himself was never completely convinced of– the organic composition tends to rise, and it tends to rise faster than the rate of surplus value,assuming that this rate trends upward as well (on Marx’s life-long aempt to grapple with thisprocess, see Heinrich 2013; for contesting views, see Heinrich et al. 2013). The progressive growth ofthe organic composition is offset by counter-tendencies; but according to Marx, over the longer-haulthe former process is stronger, causing the rate of profit to trend downward. Over time, therefore,accumulation tends to decelerate, crises multiply and capitalism becomes ever more difficult tosustain.The problems with these propositions are legion, and here we highlight three (for a more detailedaccount, see Nian and Bichler 2009a, Chs. 6-8). The first problem is with the unit of measurement.Labour values, which Marx’s variables are denominated in, cannot be observed or examined directly,making their empirical inquiry difficult if not impossible. The second problem is that mechanizationper se can tell us nothing about labour values. Even if we accept Marx’s value scheme, it is entirelypossible for technical change to devalue constant capital faster than the rate at which capitalistsaugment their ‘physical machinery’ (however measured). If that happens, the organic compositionwill fall rather than rise. Third and finally, for Marx, the economy is bifurcated into productive andunproductive activity. The former produces surplus value, while the laer uses it – yet there is noobjective basis to deciding which economic activity is productive and which is not.The consequences of this last problem are illustrated in Figures 7 and 8, which pertain to the UnitedStates. Since labour values cannot be observed, in both charts we assume – as most Marxists do intheir empirical analysis – that these values are more or less equal to market prices. Of course, if thisassumption is incorrect, the estimates we present here are meaningless.Figure 7 takes a naïve perspective. It is naïve because in this chart we do not pretend to be able todistinguish productive from unproductive labour, and instead assume, contrary to most Marxists, thatall economic activity is productive of surplus value. The dashed line approximates the organiccomposition of capital. It is estimated by taking the ratio between the current (replacement) dollar costof all non-residential fixed assets and the dollar value of employee compensation. The solid linemeasures the Marxist rate of profit, computed as the ratio of net operating surplus (which is netdomestic product less employee compensation) and the sum of the current dollar cost of fixed assetsand employee compensation.[7]Now, on the face of it, the current crisis seems consistent with Marx’s theory. We can see that, sincethe early 2000s, the organic composition has risen and the rate of profit has dropped. Moreover, thisinverse relationship seems to hold – at least cyclically – for the entire period since the 1930s.Technically, this inverse cyclicality is not entirely surprising. Since fixed assets appear in thenumerator of one ratio (the organic composition) and the denominator of the other (the rate of profit),their variations will cause the two ratios to move inversely, by definition.The difficulty with this figure lies in the longer-term trends. The rate of profit in the chart seems totrend downward, in line with Marx’s theory. But this decline is supposed to be caused by a risingorganic composition of capital, whereas in the chart this composition seems to have fallen over time. Inother words, the long-term decline in the rate of profit – assuming we accept its definition here – musthave been caused by factors other than the organic composition of capital.Now, adherents of the falling tendency theory would likely contest our naïveté here. In order toproperly compute the organic composition and the rate of profit, they would argue, we must firstdifferentiate between productive activity that produces surplus value and unproductive activity thatuses surplus value. This, though, is easier said than done. And since nobody knows exactly whichlabour activity is productive and which is not, Marxists take a shortcut. They identify entire sectorsthat they deem to be productive and separate them from all other sectors, which they classify asunproductive (see, for example, Shaikh and Tonak 1994; Carchedi 2011).Figure 8 follows this standard Marxist practice. It identifies four sectors as the productive core of theU.S. economy: agriculture, mining, construction and manufacturing.[8] The remaining sectors areconsidered unproductive. With this bifurcation, the organic composition of capital is calculated not forthe economy as a whole, but only for the four sectors that produce surplus value. Part of this surplusvalue is appropriated by capitalists in these productive sectors; the rest is appropriated by thecapitalists and workers of the unproductive sectors. To calculate the overall surplus value we subtractfrom net domestic income the wage bill of the productive sectors.[9] We then divide this surplus valueby the sum of the fixed assets and wages of the productive sectors, to get the rate of profit.Now, unlike in Figure 7, in this chart the organic composition trends upward, as it should – but, then,so does the rate of profit! In Marxist terms, this relationship means that there are counter-tendenciesthat more than offset the long-term impact of the rising organic composition. Proponents of thistheory may again contest that our particular choice of productive and unproductive sectors isinappropriate, and maybe they are right. Unfortunately, though, there is no way to objectivelydelineate the two sectors, and this inability creates the temptation to choose the particular bifurcationwhose results happen to be consistent with the theory. Finally, we should reiterate that (1) we areusing neoclassical price data rather than (unavailable) Marxist labour values, so what we see in thesecharts might have nothing to do with Marx’s theory to begin with; and (2) since labour values remainunknown, there is no way to know whether our findings support or undermine Marx’s theory.The Reserve Army of the Unemployed and the Real WageAnother driver of crisis in Marx is the relationship between the reserve army of unemployed and thereal wage. For Marx, unemployment is the regulatory mechanism that ascertains that wages gravitatetoward their subsistence level. During a boom, the bargaining power of workers strengthens, so thereal wage tends to rise above its labour value. This rise squeezes profit, causing capitalists to investless. A crisis then ensues, unemployment rises, and the real wage is compressed back to subsistence.Figure 9 examines this process with respect to the United States. The chart shows two series. The rateof unemployment, represented by the dashed line, is ploed against the right logarithmic scale. Therate of change of the real wage is shown by the solid line and is ploed against the left inverted scale.The inversion means that a downward movement of this series in the chart represents a rise in the rateof growth of the real wage. Note that both series are smoothed as 5-year trailing averages.This relationship, which does not depend on knowing labour values, seems consistent with the spiritof Marx’s claims and looks highly robust. Whenever unemployment rises, the rate of change of thereal wage falls – and vice versa when unemployment falls. Both series show a significant change in therun-up to the current crisis: unemployment fell since the early 1980s, and particularly during the1990s, while the rate of change of the real wage accelerated in tandem with this fall. In light of thesedevelopments, the crisis of the 2000s could be interpreted, at least in part, as a classical Marxistbacklash set in motion to rid capitalists of excessive wages squeezing their profit. And indeed, sincethe onset of the crisis, the rate of unemployment has soared and the rate of growth of the real wagehas been reduced to a standstill. Whether this process is the principal driver of the crisis of course ishard to tell, but it is certainly consistent with it.But the connection to Marx’s theory here, although intuitively appealing, is ultimately misleading. ForMarx, the significance of the reserve army lies in its impact not on the rate of change of the real wage,but on its absolute level. Figure 10 examines this laer impact, and the picture it depicts is verydifferent from that of Figure 9. The chart shows the rate of unemployment against the right log scaleand the real wage level against the left log scale. We use two real-wage series – for production workersin manufacturing only and for all workers in the nonfarm business sector. Both series are expressed asindices.Unlike Figure 9, this chart seems to present an anomaly. We can see that, as Marx might haveexpected, the level of real wages moved inversely with unemployment till the early 1940s – yet, fromthen onward, the relationship inverted. Unemployment started to rise and continued to do so till theearly 1980s; but the real wage, instead of falling or at least stagnating, rose in tandem. Moreover, whenunemployment stopped rising and even fell during the 1990s, the real wage, instead of rising,stagnated. From this viewpoint, the reserve army of the unemployed no longer seems to play the rolethat Marx alloed to it in the nineteenth century, at least not in any evident way. Compared to theearlier postwar era, the real wage during the 1990s and 2000s has hardly changed, so it is difficult tosee it as a ‘profit squeezing’ factor underlying the current crisis.UnderconsumptionThe third Marxist driver of crisis is underconsumption. Unlike the theory of the falling tendency of therate of profit, which emphasizes the limits on the production of surplus value, underconsumption dealswith the limits on the realization of surplus value. The starting point is the more or less universal factthat workers, because of their lower income, spend most if not all of that income on consumption. Bycontrast, capitalists, whose income is much higher, can afford – and are compelled by their social roleas capitalists – to save most of it. So, all else remaining the same, an upward redistribution of incomefrom workers to capitalists will tend to reduce the average share of consumption in aggregatespending. The consequence of this reduction, say the underconsumptionists, is a glut of unsoldcommodities, lower prices and lower profit. And since falling profit tends to lower investmentspending, we end up with a generalized ‘realization crisis’.Until the early twentieth century, this view was not particularly popular among Marxists, partlybecause Marx himself seemed rather ambivalent about it. But the rise of European imperialism in thelaer half of the nineteenth century, the Great Depression of the 1930s, and the militarized boom ofthe Second World War changed this aitude. Following John Hobson’s pioneering work onImperialism (1902), Marxists started to seriously contemplate the significance of realization forcapitalist crisis (Hilferding 1910; Luxemburg 1913; Kautsky 1914; Lenin 1917). And with Keynes’emphasis on deficient demand, Marxist underconsumption theories enjoyed a significant revival (for acritical analysis, see Bichler and Nian 2012c).The most innovative contributor to this literature was the Polish political economist Michal Kalecki(for a posthumous edited collection, see Kalecki 1971). Writing in the early 1930s, Kalecki developed aclass-based micro-macro model that anticipated and, in some important sense, went beyond Keynes.One of the key novelties of Kalecki’s model was the role played by the market structure and theconsequences of that structure for the distribution of income and the level of aggregate demand(Kalecki 1933, 1939, 1943; Asimakopulos 1975, 1987). According to Kalecki, modern corporatestructures tend to be highly concentrated. The extent of this concentration, he said, can be measuredby the ‘degree of monopoly’, which he defined as (approximately) equal to the ratio of unit profit tounit price, or the share of capital in national income. All else being the same, he said, the higher thedegree of monopoly – and therefore the higher the income share of capital – the lower the averageshare of consumption in aggregate spending, and hence the greater the tendency toward deficientdemand and stagnation.Later on, this insight became a key theoretical basis for the Monopoly Capital School. According tothis school – led by Paul Baran and Paul Sweezy and others associated with the journal MonthlyReview – oligopolistic capitalism tends to generate stagflation and needs wasteful spending –particularly military expenditures and financialization – to offset this tendency (Steindl 1952; Tsuru1956; Baran and Sweezy 1966; Magdoff and Sweezy 1983; Foster and Szlajfer 1984).Kalecki’s argument can be generalized beyond its original emphasis on capital versus labour. If theshare of consumption in personal income is associated negatively with the level of personal income,then we should expect personal or household income inequality, regardless of its source, to beinversely correlated with the pace of economic activity.Figure 11 examines this proposition for the United States. The doed line at the boom shows theincome share of the top 1 per cent of the U.S. population (for a comparative critical assessment ofincome-distribution data, see Burkhauser et al. 2012). The solid series at the top of the chart depicts thepace of economic activity, approximated here by the rate of growth of employment. Note that we useemployment growth rather than overall economic growth. The reason is that, as it is commonlymeasured, overall growth is affected by both employment and productivity growth, but only theformer responds directly to underconsumption. Both series are smoothed as 10-year trailing averages.The relationship shown in the figure is rather remarkable. We can discern three distinct periods,indicated by the dashed, freely drawn line going through the employment series. The first period,from the turn of the century till the 1930s, is the so-called Gilded Age. Income inequality is rising (atleast during the period for which data are available) and employment growth is plummeting.The second period, from the Great Depression till the early 1980s, is marked by the Keynesian welfare-warfare state. Higher taxation and spending make distribution more equal, while employment growthaccelerates. Note the massive acceleration of employment growth during the Second World War andits subsequent deceleration brought by postwar demobilization. Obviously these dramatic movementsare unrelated to income inequality, but they do not alter the series’ overall upward trend.The third period, from the early 1980s to the present, is marked by neoliberalism. In this period,monetarism assumes the commanding heights, inequality starts to soar, and employment growthplummets. The current rate of employment growth hovers around zero while the top 1 per centappropriates 20 per cent of all income – similar to the numbers recorded during the Great Depression.Figure 11 certainly seems consistent with the Monopoly Capital version of underconsumption. Itsuggests that the current crisis is the culmination of a systemic increase in inequality that began in theearly 1980s, which in turn bred underconsumption tendencies and lowered employment growth to astandstill (for a survey of debates and evidence on the role of income inequality in the recent crisis, seevan Treeck and Sturn 2012; on wage-led growth, see Lavoie and Stockhammer 2013).For the underconsumptionists, geing out of this crisis now depends on what happens to inequality.If the distribution of income can be made more equal – as it was after the Great Depression – a newphase of growth may ensue. But if increasing inequality is inherent to the present logic of capital – forexample, because of the drive toward greater exploitation or the imperative of higher concentrationand centralization – then the crisis may be difficult if not impossible to resolve.Note, though, that for the underconsumptionists,, accumulation and redistribution are two distinctprocesses. The goal is accumulation – or, in this case, averting an accumulation crisis – whileredistribution is merely the means for achieving that goal. But then, what exactly do we mean bycrisis? So far, we have treated this concept as if it were self-evident – but is it?The Common Economic Underpinnings of Marxism and LiberalismFor Marxists as well as mainstream liberal economists, the engine of capitalism is the economy, andspecifically the accumulation of capital and the growth of GDP. Accumulation and growth are seen astwo sides of the same process. Accumulation generates growth, and growth sustains accumulation.Both are thought of as ‘economic’ processes, denominated in ‘real’ terms of production andconsumption. From this viewpoint, crisis is a breakdown of both real accumulation and growth.And that is what we see in Figure 12. The boom panel of the figure shows the level of the U.S. realcapital stock and GDP since 1929, while the top panel shows their respective rates of growthsmoothed as 5-year trailing averages. Both the levels and rates of change of the two magnitudes movein tandem. And if we take the top panel at face value, our conclusion would be that the current crisiscomes at the tail end of a prolonged deceleration that began in the late 1960s and has recentlyculminated in a near breakdown.Considered in conjunction with evidence shown earlier in the paper, this process seems consistentwith the Marxist claim that accumulation rests on class conflict, and that this conflict makes capitalismprone to crisis. But if we examine Figure 13, we can also see that, in terms of their so-called realincomes, the fate of both capitalists and workers goes hand in hand with the economy. The chartshows the levels and rates of growth of real labour income and real capitalist income (pretax profitand net interest), and both trace the level of real GDP and oscillate in tandem with its rate of growth.In this very basic sense, then, Marxists and liberal economists sit on the same side of the fence. In bothperspectives, the material interests of capitalists and workers depend on economic growth and capitalaccumulation, and if this twin engine fails, as it does during a crisis, both classes lose.The difference between the two approaches lies in the reasons they give for the crisis and whether ornot it can be averted. Mainstream economists root crises in imperfections, distortions and misguidedintervention that can be solved or counteracted by adequate policy (primarily deregulatory), whereasMarxists claim that crises are built into the conflictual class logic of capitalism and therefore aredifficult to fix and impossible to eliminate. But both agree on what constitutes a crisis in the first place:a sharp decline in real economic activity and income.Capital as PowerThe theory of capital as power differs radically from both Marxism and mainstream economics(Nian and Bichler 2009a; Bichler and Nian 2012b). Capital, it argues, is not an economic entity, butan institution of power. So, at its core, a crisis of accumulation is not a crisis of production orconsumption, but a crisis of capitalist power (Bichler and Nian 2010; Kliman, Bichler, and Nian2011; Bichler and Nian 2012a).Now, what do we mean by capitalist power? Following the explicitly scientific notion of power, firstarticulated by Johannes Kepler in 1600, we see capitalist power not as a qualitative stand-alone entity,but as a quantified relationship between entities. In capitalism, this quantitative relationship ismanifested through the distributional grid of incomes and assets between capitalist and non-capitalistclasses, as well as among the capitalists themselves. In other words, for capitalists, redistribution is nota means to an end, but the end itself.Based on this notion, we suggested in the late 1990s two tentative conditions for what constitutes asustained regime of accumulation (Nian 1998). The first and key condition is non-negativedifferential accumulation; in other words, that the capitalization of dominant capital rises or at leastremains stable relative to the capitalization of the average firm. This condition reflects both the powerdrive of accumulation as well as the necessity to exercise power in order to bring society undereffective business control.The second condition is a steady or rising capital share of income. This condition is partly an indirectresult of the first condition; however, it also reflects the overall balance of power between capitalistsand other societal groups. Unless this condition is fulfilled, the ‘capitalist’ nature of the system couldbe put into question.Within this context, a significant violation of one or both criteria brings the threat of a major capitalistcrisis.Note that the operational definitions of these two conditions are open-ended. To make them precise,we need to clearly delineate capital income, define the boundaries of dominant capital and itsreferential average, and set the relevant time periods for computing the trajectories of the differentmeasures. The remainder of this section presents a tentative, broad-brush approximation of these twopower processes, examines their political-economic underpinnings, and assesses what they mightmean for policymaking in a world where capital is power.The Evolution of Capitalist Power in the United StatesFigure 14 examines the historical evolution of our two criteria in the United States. The chart, whichrevises and updates research that we first presented in the late 1990s (Nian 1998), shows twocomprehensive measures of capitalist income. Capitalist income is defined here as pretax profit andnet interest – or what the accountants call EBIT, an acronym for ‘earnings before interest and taxes’.Begin with the top doed series. This series, ploed against the left arithmetic scale, shows the shareof pretax profit and net interest in overall national income. The unmistakable trend of the series is up.Since 1929, the relative power of capitalists, measured here by their income share, has risen by onethird – from roughly 12 per cent to about 16 per cent. Furthermore, the volatility of this share,indicated by the gradual convergence of the top and boom dashed lines, has been reducedsignificantly. And if we take volatility as a proxy for risk, we would conclude that the risk facingcapitalists has declined as well.The boom series, ploed against the right log scale, shows the differential capitalist income of thelargest 200 U.S.-incorporated firms (we use income rather than capitalization here, since the laermeasure is unavailable for most firms). This differential shows the EBIT of an average corporation inthe top 200 group relative to the EBIT of an average U.S. corporation and is calculated in three steps:(1) by computing the average EBIT of the largest 200 firms; (2) by computing the sum of pretax profitand net interest for the average U.S. corporation; and (3) by dividing the former by the laer.Here too the paern is remarkable. Since we are using a log scale, the slope of the line is indicative ofits rate of change. Overall, the differential income of the top 200 U.S.-based firms rose from about1,000 in the early 1950s to nearly 18,000 by the mid 2000s, representing an average annual differentialaccumulation of over 4.5 per cent.[10]Note that as we move from viewing capital as an economic entity to seeing it as relationship of power,the picture inverts. Whereas economic growth, the accumulation of so-called fixed assets and thegrowth of real labour and capital income have all decelerated since the 1960s, the differential power ofcapitalists in general and of dominant capital in particular has trended upward.The Two Crises of Capital as PowerThe increase in differential capitalist income since the 1950s has been relatively smooth – with twoexceptions: two brief periods in which dominant capital experienced differential decumulation. (1) Inthe late 1970s, differential accumulation started to decelerate, and by the early 1980s, it suffered adeep, 15 per cent drop. However, with Ronald Reagan in the White House, monetarism back in thedriver’s seat and neoliberalism in full swing, the increase quickly resumed and lasted for anothertwenty years. (2) During the early 2000s, the process again started to slow down, and in 2007 therewas a marked decline: in the following two years, the top 200 firms saw their differential income dropby nearly 30 per cent; and although the differential has since risen, its 2013 level is still 15 per centbelow its historical peak.The late 2000s episode is different from the one in the early 1980s in two respects. First, in the 1980s,while dominant capital was suffering differential decumulation, the share of capital in nationalincome was actually rising. By contrast, in the late 2000s, both differential accumulation and thecapitalist share of income were falling. Second, and perhaps much more ominously for capitalists,nowadays both measures of power are probably more difficult to increase than they were during the1980s.With respect to differential accumulation, this greater difficulty is evident from the mere fact that thedifferential EBIT of the top 200 corporations is now roughly three times higher than it was in the1980s. Pushing this magnitude even further – let alone having it grow at its average historical rate of4.5% – will require an avalanche of mergers and acquisitions commensurate with the mammoth sizeof dominant capital and/or intense measures to increase differential markups more and more – analready tall order that will grow even taller with every further increase in the differential size ofdominant capital (on strategies and regimes of differential accumulation, see Nian 2001; Nian andBichler 2009a: Chs. 15-17).Capital as Power and Strategic Sabotagep g gTo understand the limits on the overall share of capital in national income, we turn now to the twolast charts of the paper – Figures 15 and 16 (for the earliest presentation of this relationship, see Nianand Bichler 2000; for recent commentary, see Bichler and Nian 2014). The relationship presented inthese figures might seem counter-intuitive – but only if you take your cue from the ‘economic’understanding of capitalism. If you look at these relationships from the viewpoint of capital as power,the puzzle quickly disappears.Figure 15 shows the overall share of capital in domestic income along with the rate of unemployment.The top panel displays the levels of the two variables, both smoothed as 5-year trailing averages. Thesolid line, ploed against the left log scale, shows pretax profit and net interest as a percent ofdomestic income. The doed line, ploed against the right log scale, shows the rate of unemploymentthree years earlier. The boom panel shows the annual rates of change of the two top variables since1940.The same relationship is displayed, somewhat differently, in Figure 16. This chart shows the twovariables from Figure 15 for the 1947-2013 period – but instead of ploing them against time, it plotsthem against each other (for an analysis of the entire 1929-2013 period, see Bichler and Nian 2014).The capitalist share of domestic income is ploed against the vertical axis, while the rate ofunemployment three years earlier is ploed against the horizontal axis.[11]The direction and tightness of this relationship leave lile to the imagination. If we regress thecapitalist share of domestic income against the rate of unemployment three years earlier, we find thatfor every 1 per cent increase in unemployment, there is 0.8 per cent increase in the capitalist share ofdomestic income three years later (see the straight OLS regression line going through theobservations). The R-squared of the regression indicates that, between 1947 and 2013 changes in theunemployment rate accounted for 82 per cent of the squared variations of capitalist income three yearslater.Can Capitalists Afford Recovery?What do Figures 15 and 16 tell us? From the viewpoint of both mainstream economics and Marxism,the relationships in these figures are highly counterintuitive (the conventional view is that the capitalincome share is pro-cyclical – see Giammarioli et al. 2002; Schneider 2011 – exactly the opposite ofwhat we see in the figures). Because accumulation and growth are seen as two sides of the sameprocess, unemployment is generally viewed as a curse for both capitalists and workers. As noted,Marx was prescient in identifying the role of rising unemployment in disciplining workers andreducing their wages back to their labour values. But this process is supposed to serve accumulationonly for brief periods, particularly toward the peak of the business cycle. Over the longer haul,though, capitalists, just like workers, are interested in growth and therefore in low unemployment,not high unemployment.Figures 15 and 16 portray a completely different process, with wide-ranging implications. Here, thedriving force of capitalism is not absolute but relative: it is not economic growth and the accumulationof productive machines and structures that count, but the differential accumulation of capitalizedpower. Now, understood as a power process, differential accumulation requires strategic sabotage,and this sabotage can take different forms. We have explored many of these forms in our previousworks, and there are now young researchers who are extending this inquiry into new fields andregions.[12] But as the charts vividly illustrate, of these many processes of sabotage, the threat andexercise of unemployment remains central and crucial – not only temporarily as Marx suggested, butpermanently.This claim has significant implications for economic policy. As it turns out, the problem ofpolicymakers is not only that their dogma has collapsed and that their ammunition has run out, butalso, and more importantly, that their very policy goal is self-contradictory. Capitalist policy is geared,first and foremost, toward accumulation. If accumulation recovers, argue both Marxists and liberals,economic growth will recover in tandem, and the tide of growth will then help lift up all boats –including those of workers – by lowering unemployment and raising the real wage.This logic, though, is premised on capital being a ‘real’ economic entity. However, if we instead thinkof capital as power, there is no way for policymakers to achieve both goals simultaneously, and for asimple reason: capitalists cannot afford recovery. In order for policymakers to boost the capitalist share ofincome, they need not to lower unemployment, but to raise it.With these thoughts in mind, the final question to ask is what lies ahead? If the relationship depictedin Figure 15 continues to hold, the share of capitalists in U.S. domestic income, expressed as a five-year trailing average, is set to rise further in the coming years. The crisis has raised unemployment toits highest level since the 1930s, so looking forward, this increase in strategic sabotage should boostthe power of capital and therefore its distributive share of income.But capitalists are never content with the status quo. Their regime compels them to augment theircapitalized power further and further, and that means more strategic sabotage and therefore evengreater unemployment. And it is this need for ever greater sabotage – and the risk of backlash thatrecord levels of sabotage may trigger – that fuels the lingering systemic fear of both capitalists andtheir policymakers.[Note: This piece was first published in Review of Capital as Power, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 110-155.]End notes:[1] This paper was first presented in Surplus, Solidarity, Sufficiency, The Eighth InternationalRethinking Marxism Conference, University of Massachuses at Amherst, September 19–22, 2013.Research for this paper was partly supported by the Social Sciences and Research Council of Canada.[2] Friedman held onto both ends of the stick. ‘In some sense’, he wrote (1968a: 15), ‘we are allKeynesians now; in another, no one is a Keynesian any longer. We all use the Keynesian language andapparatus; none of us any longer accepts the initial Keynesian conclusions’. Nixon was less subtle,announcing that he was ‘now a Keynesian in economics’ (Anonymous 1971).[3] The language is definitive. According to Nobel Memorial Prize winner Milton Friedman (1968b: 8),‘At any moment of time there is some level of unemployment which has the property that it isconsistent with equilibrium in the structure of real wage rates. . . . The “natural rate ofunemployment”, in other words, is the level that would be ground out by the Walrasian system ofgeneral equilibrium equations, provided there is embedded in them the actual structuralcharacteristics of the labor and commodity markets, including market imperfections, stochasticvariability in demands and supplies, the cost of gathering information about job vacancies and laboravailability, the costs of mobility, and so on’. For Edmund Phelps, another Nobelist of monetaristrepute, a certain rate of unemployment is not only ‘natural’ but also desirable (provided it excludestenured professors, of course). In his expert opinion, most of the so-called unemployed are merely‘searching’ for a beer job. ‘It would be as senselessly puritanical to wipe out unemployment as itwould be to raise taxes in a deep depression’. There is nothing to worry about, he concludes. On thecontrary: ‘Today’s unemployment is an investment in a beer allocation of any given quantity ofemployed persons tomorrow’ (1970: 17). The very same point was reiterated by another monetarist ofNobelistic repute, Robert Lucas: ‘When we are unemployed’, he observed, ‘it is because we think wecan do beer’ (interviewed by Snowdon and Vane 2005: 290, emphases added). And that must be true.After all, it is well known that whenever Phelps and Lucas invested in their own unemployment, theyalways ended up making a bundle.[4] A recent scandalized version of this warning was issued by Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff,who claimed that ‘across both advanced countries and emerging markets, high debt/GDP levels (90percent and above) are associated with notably lower growth outcomes’ (Reinhart and Rogoff 2010:577). Coming from top pundits, this warning was happily leveraged in support of austerity measur