Maluku Economic Recovery During the Covid-19 Pandemic and Entering the New Normal Era

Media Trend
Berkala Kajian Ekonomi dan Studi Pembangunan
MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
http://journal.trunojoyo.ac.id/mediatrend
Maluku Economic Recovery During the Covid-19 Pandemic and Entering the 
New Normal Era
Maryam Sangadji1*, Fahrudin Ramly2, Yuyun Yuniarti Layn3
1,2,3 Pattimura University
A B S T R A C TArticle Information
History of article:
Received January 2020
Approved February 2021
Published March 2021
© 2021 MediaTrend
Author correspondence:
E-mail: maryam_sng@yahoo.co.id  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.21107/mediatrend.v15i2.9513
2460-7649 © 2020 MediaTrend. All rights reserved.
Covid-19 globally has affected all sectors, and the lock down has aggravated world 
economic conditions, including Maluku Province. The research objectives are (1) to 
describe the sectors affected by the Covid-19 pandemic in terms of economic growth; (2) 
Describe the impact of covid-19 on the workforce; (3) Knowing the policies carried out by 
local governments in handling the socio-economic impacts of Covid-19; (4) Formulating 
a strategy for economic recovery from the impact of covid-19 and entering the new 
normal era. The method used in this research is descriptive quantitative, from the data 
published by competent government agencies. The results showed (1) out of 17 sectors, 
there were 13 sectors that experienced a contraction in economic growth, showing that 
the initial impact of Covid-19 in Jakarta had contributed to the economic contraction 
in Maluku in tw 1 and tw-2, economic growth declined due to PSBB in the city. Ambon. 
(2) the number of unemployed increases with the number of layoffs and workers who 
are laid off. (3) Regional government policies are very maximal in terminating the chain 
of transmission but have not been able to reduce the level of spread, the longer efforts to 
deal with the transmission chain through PSBB will have an increasingly impact on the 
economy and (4) Economic recovery strategies can be implemented through five activities 
in 2020 in the third quarter to to IV and in the year 2021
Keywords: Covid-19, Maluku Economic Recovery, New Normal Era
JEL Classification Code: P25, O47, O17
Maryam Sangadji, et al. MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
111
INTRODUCTION 
 A country’s economic growth is de-
termined by its regional economy (Ascani, 
Crescenzi and Lammarino, 2012). The 
success of a country’s economic growth 
depends on the success of its regional de-
velopment. An area is said to be growing 
and developing characterized by a growth 
in per capita income, changes in employ-
ment, changes in population and employ-
ment, growth in business and growth in 
human resources (Lewis, 1980; Mathur, 
1999). This Covid-19 pandemic will de-
mand changes in the economic growth 
scenario as in the 2020-2024 RPJMN.
 The spread of the corona virus 
globally continues to increase, until 12 Au-
gust 2020 as many as 20,492,950 infec-
tions, with 744,134 deaths and 13,417,612 
recoveries (Kompas, 12/8/2020). The num-
ber of casualties caused panic so that sev-
eral countries have responded with various 
policies of entry and exit of people or lock 
down in order to break the chain of trans-
mission such as China, the United States, 
Britain and countries in Europe. This lock 
down caused the productive economies 
in all countries to stall and caused an eco-
nomic downturn over the crisis and reces-
sion in the depression period of the early 
20th century.
 The world economy is experienc-
ing contraction. In view of the economic 
growth, according to the IMF, it is esti-
mated that economic growth will decline 
by around -3.0%. Meanwhile, Indonesia 
is estimated to be around 0.5%. This con-
traction is inseparable from the economic 
conditions of Indonesia’s partner countries 
such as the United States with growth of 
-4.8% and China -6.8%. Of course this con-
dition has a very big impact on the national 
and regional economy, especially since In-
donesia still has high dependence on other 
countries. What about Maluku Province as 
an archipelago? It turns out that the same 
conditions have also been experienced 
since the covid-19 pandemic can be seen 
from the economic growth also experi-
encing contraction in the first quarter re-
port with negative growth in most sectors, 
there are 13 sectors with minus growth 
out of 17 sectors forming PDRB (BRS Ma-
luku, 2020) . Economic growth contracted 
more deeply in the second quarter, along 
with the regional-scale Social Restrictions 
(PSBR) policy and increased to large-scale 
social restrictions (PSBB) in line with the 
increasing number of people affected by 
Covid-19. The conditions that require the 
implementation of the PSBR and PSBB 
have stopped the mobility of people and 
goods, halted production activities, work-
ers have been laid off and at home, have 
even caused many people to experience 
difficulties in fulfilling their daily needs, or 
have weakened people’s purchasing pow-
er. This cycle that occurs in a cumulative 
circular manner makes economic growth in 
13 sectors experience a negative growth in 
the first and second quarters (q to q).
 Based on the portrait of Maluku’s 
economic development for two quarters, 
strategic efforts are needed through sev-
eral other economic indicators that can be 
photographed through this research so 
that handling steps during the Covid-19 
pandemic and entering the new normal 
era can be input for economic recovery in 
Maluku. As the background of the above 
research, this study will examine “Maluku 
Economic Recovery in the Covid-19 Pan-
demic Period and Entering the New Nor-
mal Era”.
METHODOLOGY
 The data used in this study are 
quantitative secondary data published by 
competent government agencies such as 
the Maluku Central Bureau of Statistics 
(BPS), Bank Indonesia, the Manpower Of-
fice, the Tourism Office and other relevant 
agencies. The data is collected from pe-
riodicals in the form of books and reports 
from government agencies. The collected 
data were then analyzed using quantita-
Maluku Economic Recovery....... MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
112
tive descriptive methods with the help of 
graphs and tables.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
 The impact of the Covid-19 pan-
demic in Maluku has been felt since the 
first quarter. The economy contracted both 
in terms of demand and supply. Production 
activities almost stopped at the same time 
household consumption and government 
consumption as components of support for 
Maluku’s economic growth experienced a 
sharp decline.
 The economic cycle cannot move, 
there are job relations terminated, work-
ers are laid off with no income, the com-
pany also has no income which has conse-
quences for unemployment and increases 
poverty. Report from the Governor of Malu-
ku, the number of poverty increased due to 
the impact of Covid-19 by 40% from 17% 
or an increase of 23%.
 Maluku province’s economic 
growth grew by 4.01% in the first quarter 
(y on y) of 2020, but experienced a con-
traction (q to q) of -2.32% when compared 
to the fourth quarter of 2019. second quar-
ter (q to q) of 2020 amounting to -2.62%. 
The decrease in contraction occurred as 
a result of policies since the Regional-
Scale Social Restrictions (PSBR) since 
April-May. In June 2020 this status was 
upgraded to Large-Scale Social Restric-
tions (PSBB), so that economic activity is 
increasingly paralyzed. When compared 
to the conditions before Covid-19 in 2019, 
the second quarter with the second quarter 
of 2020 (y on y) after Covid-19 illustrates 
that Maluku’s economy is also in a state of 
contraction of -0.92% (BRS Maluku, 2020).
 Based on the 17 PDRB sectors in 
Maluku, there are 13 sectors that contribut-
ed to Maluku’s economic growth in the first 
quarter of 2020, indicated by the value of 
the growth rate having decreased (-), and 
there were eight sectors that had the high-
est decline. The sectors that experienced 
the biggest decline were the construction 
and education services sector, respec-
tively -5.52% and -5.32% (tw-1). While the 
growth contraction in (tw-2) was the trans-
portation and warehousing business sec-
tor -17.97%, followed by the business sec-
tor providing accommodation and food and 
drink with a growth contraction of -11.88%, 
a sharp decline from the first quarter and 
the trade category. retail, car and motor-
cycle repair experienced a growth contrac-
tion of -4.23%.
 Several phenomena describe a 
contraction in the sector, namely, in the 
first quarter, Maluku experienced contrac
Source: Maluku TW 1 and TW-2 of BPS report
Figure 1.
Highest Economic Growth Contraction
Maryam Sangadji, et al. MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
113
tion when it was discovered that there was 
one case of exposure on 22 March. This 
indicates that the spread of affected peo-
ple has increased in DKI Jakarta, and has 
spread throughout the country, thus para-
lyzing all regional economic activities in 
Indonesia including Maluku, both in imple-
menting programs related to budgets that 
must be allocated to regions, as well as 
other economic activities. at the center, it 
is difficult to distribute them to the regions. 
Most investors cannot take the risk that 
development activities in the regions will 
continue. And in the second quarter, DKI 
Jakarta has implemented the PSBB on 10-
23 April 2020.
 There is a government policy to 
“refocus” and “reallocate” several activities 
and programs, which apply nationally. The 
decision to adjust the reallocation and re-
focusing of the APBD budget is based on 
the joint decision of the Minister of Home 
Affairs and the Minister of Finance Number 
119/2813 / SJ and 117 / KMK 07/2020 con-
cerning the Acceleration of Adjustment of 
the 2020 APBD.
 The joint decision of the two minis-
tries will certainly have an impact on pro-
gram adjustments that must be re-planned, 
and there will be delays related to program 
implementation (1) the Regional-Scale 
Social Restrictions policy and its status 
upgraded to Large-Scale Social Restric-
tions, especially in Ambon City, will stop 
production activities and have an impact 
on decreasing. public consumption, (2) the 
Refocusing and Reallocation policy makes 
several programs such as official travel 
and physical activities partially eliminated, 
and (3) PSBB conditions, causing physical 
activities to experience delays, as a follow-
up impact, administrative problems there 
is no bidding process at the OPD level, so 
that construction services experienced the 
sharpest contraction. Meanwhile educa-
tion services also contracted until the sec-
ond quarter, as a result of the government 
policy taking steps for a while teaching and 
learning activities at all levels of education 
were carried out online, which had a “de-
creasing” impact on all derivative products 
of Education services such as canteens, 
photocopies, transportation. and others.
 Economic growth in terms of us-
age that has the largest contribution is 
Household Consumption (KRT), followed 
by government consumption. The growth 
rate of KRT (y-on-y) was 2.10%. However, 
during the pandemic, its growth (q-to-q) 
contracted by -5.56%, this indicates that 
during the first quarter of 2020, the house-
hold sector experienced a relatively large 
impact. Whereas in the second quarter the 
role of household consumption decreased 
its growth rate (y-on-y) which was equal to 
-1.24, meaning that the tw-1 growth rate 
was positive while in tw-2 it decreased 
with a negative value, it is clear that both 
PSBR and PSBB has a high influence on 
the downward fluctuation of household 
consumption growth in the second quarter 
(y on y) also continues to contract: (Food 
and beverages, clothing and grooming 
services, housing and household supplies, 
health, education, restaurants and so on) .
 Government consumption contract-
ed higher than household consumption in 
the first quarter (q to q), because most of 
the collective consumption for develop-
ment had not yet been implemented, as 
did individual consumption such as official 
travel and so on. In the second quarter, the 
government has implemented several poli-
cies that can stimulate government con-
sumption, for example the covid impact 
budget distributed to vulnerable communi-
ties in the form of direct cash assistance 
(BLT), assistance for employees affected 
by layoffs, pre-employment cards that will 
function for four months will be given in-
centives. IDR 600,000 per month, so that 
it can drive the consumption of vulnerable 
people. Government policy by increasing 
government consumption can increase 
economic growth, as seen in the second 
quarter (q to q) there was a positive growth 
Maluku Economic Recovery....... MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
114
of 0.17. This means that the government as 
the controller of development has played 
a role in maintaining economic growth in 
terms of consumption in the second quar-
ter.
 The Maluku Provincial government 
policy breaks the chain of spread of Co-
vid-19 in the form of regional-scale social 
restrictions and is then upgraded to Large-
Scale Social Restrictions, especially in Am-
bon City as an area that has a red zone, 
impacting on population movement outside 
the home and limiting population mobility 
between regions. The consequences of 
the policies taken have an impact on eco-
nomic costs as well as social costs such as 
increased unemployment as a result of the 
cessation of company operations.
 February 2020 unemployment in 
Maluku was 52,710, decreased by 111 peo-
ple (0.21%) compared to February 2019 of 
52,821 people. However, the Open Unem-
ployment Rate (TPT, y on y) has increased 
from 6.91% February 2019 to 7.02% Feb-
ruary 2020. The Labor Force (AK) has de-
creased and unemployment has also de-
creased but the decline in unemployment 
(0.11) is not comparable with the number 
of decreases in the Labor Force (0.21). 
The number of unemployed and TPT will 
increase along with the increase in layoffs 
and workers who are laid off. July 2020, 
as many as 107 companies operating in 
Maluku have terminated 205 employees, 
and 1,793 people have been dismissed
(Disnaketrans Maluku, July 2020). Com-
panies that lay off employees and make 
layoffs, because they are unable to retain 
employees, are due to reduced activities 
and some even terminate activities (Farida 
Salampessy, 2020).
 There are 49,748 workers in Ma-
luku spread across 7,134 companies 
with details of 7,129 private companies, 5 
foreign-owned companies (Disnaketrans 
document, 2020), showing that the number 
of companies from 11 urban districts in Ma-
luku is only 5 districts / cities that carry out 
labor policies for sent home. The other six 
districts do not have any data recorded at 
the Dinas Tenaga Kerja. Since July 2020, 
East Seram Regency (SBT) is a high risk 
zone for Covid-19, while four districts (West 
Southeast Maluku, South Buru, Southeast 
Maluku, Aru Islands) have no impact or are 
included in the green zone, in fact there are 
two districts (Kep Tanimbar / Kab. Maluku 
Tenggara Barat and Maluku Tenggara) 
which houses the workers. Buru Regency 
is included in the low risk or yellow zone, 
the company directly houses workers, in 
contrast to the other three districts that are 
in the yellow zone or low risk (Tual City, 
West Seram, Southwest Maluku) do not 
lay off or lay off workers. In other words, 
districts / cities that have the same zone 
do not necessarily have the same impact 
on workers who are sent home or laid off.
Table 1.
Impact of Covid-19 on the Working Age Population August 2020
Source: BPS Maluku, 2020.
Maryam Sangadji, et al. MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
115
 Unlike the Tourism Office specifi-
cally until June 2020, the workforce af-
fected by Covid-19 in the tourism sector is 
spread across 11 regencies and cities to-
taling 3,749, the highest number in Ambon 
City 2,670 people, the second highest in 
Central Maluku Regency and the lowest in 
Southeast Maluku. as many as 19 people, 
the number of workers is scattered in res-
taurants, associations (Asita), hotels, res-
taurants.
 Since August 2020, the impact of 
Covid-19 on the working age population 
is 19,508, most people are unemployed 
because their working hours have been 
reduced by 87.75 percent, for example 
on transportation (motorcycle taxis, four-
wheeled public transportation), restaurants 
and others).
 Since the discovery of one positive 
case of Covid-19 on March 22, 2020, the 
Maluku government has been on standby 
by tightening the entrance to the Pattimu-
ra airport and port through a government 
policy called extraordinary events. Positive 
cases of exposure to covid-19 are increas-
ing until September 18, 2020, the number 
of confirmed cases is 2,510, healed 1,585, 
and in the process of healing as many as 
887 people. April - September the number 
of positive people is increasing, August 
716 and increasing per September 18 to 
725 people, meaning that the growth of 
people who will be confirmed positive in 
September will increase with the existence 
of a government policy implementing the 
obligation for all state apparatus to carry 
out swab mass in all government agencies 
of Maluku Province, and Regency / City. 
 As of October 2020, the local gov-
ernment has implemented several health 
policies to break the chain of transmis-
sion, namely: (1) Social Restrictions, (2) 
Public Education Programs. Public edu-
cation programs by local governments 
are carried out through calls on banners, 
as well as calls on other social media by 
the Task Force. (3) Massive Contac Trac-
ing Program. This activity is carried out for 
affected communities and is widely traced 
to positive confirmed patients who have a 
history of contact with other people, and (4) 
Where: 
KLB : Extraordinary event
PSBR: Regional-Scale Social Restrictions
PSBB: Large-Scale Social Restrictions
Figure 2.
Number of People Who Are Positive Covid-19 and the Transmission Chain Break-
ing Policy
Maluku Economic Recovery....... MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
116
the aggressive testing program. The fourth 
program was carried out for the communi-
ty, until October 2020, a swab was carried 
out for all government agencies of Maluku 
Province and several city districts that are 
currently doing it, that is why the number 
of people without symptoms (OTG) was 
found to be increasing, after the swab was 
carried out.
 In addition, the implementation of 
the PSBR and PSBB directly affects the 
mobility of the community towards con-
sumption and production activities which 
can be carried out in several places. 
 The percentage change in some 
places of activity with the highest decline, 
namely mobility to the workplace, de-
creased by 48 percent, as seen by chang-
es in the work pattern of the community 
who are required from home to be able 
to use virtual for government and private 
agencies, as well as in education, besides 
Most non-PNS workers were laid off and at 
home for non-PNS workers. 
 Regional revenue becomes the 
basis for determining the size of govern-
ment consumption. In addition to house-
hold consumption, what is also affected is 
government consumption on Maluku eco-
nomic growth, although it has increased 
by 0.81% compared to the fourth quarter 
of 2019, but with the existence of several 
legislative products issued by the central 
government in the fiscal and financial fields 
will affect Maluku’s development budget 
posture due to the impact of covid-19.
 Adjustments to the 2020 APBD are 
carried out by adjusting revenue transfers 
to regions and Village Funds, adjusting 
PAD by taking into account the potential 
for regional taxes and levies of each re-
gion, rationalizing personnel spending, ra-
tionalizing goods / services expenditures 
by at least 50% by reducing expenditure 
budgets, rationalizing expenditures capi-
tal of at least 50% by reducing the budget. 
Every region in Indonesia is required to 
make adjustments as outlined in the APBD 
Adjustment Report and thereafter must be 
reported to the Ministry of Finance and the 
Source: Google report
Figure 3.
Changes in Community Mobility During the Covid-19 Pandemic
Maryam Sangadji, et al. MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
117
Ministry of Home Affairs. Regional govern-
ments that do not meet the provisions of 
the 2020 APBD report may postpone the 
distribution of part of the DAU or DBH. As 
of June 2020, actual revenue has reached 
54.78%, consisting of Regional Original 
Revenue (Dispenda) reaching 49.79%, 
Transfer income of 55.78% while other le-
gal income has only reached 12.04%. The 
target of PAD acceptance in the Covid-19 
pandemic situation can be said to be good 
through optimal efforts that have been 
made by the Regional Revenue Service of 
Maluku Province and building synergy with 
all OPDs in order to accelerate the realiza-
tion and optimization of the potential explo-
ration of PAD.
 PAD the largest contribution is still 
contributed by Regional Taxes, the real-
ization is around 53.54%, including Motor 
Vehicle Tax of 53.68%, Transfer of Motor 
Vehicle Title Fee of 64.40%, Motor Vehicle 
Fuel Tax of 60 , 65%, ground water tax of 
26.84% and cigarette tax of 43.60%. The 
achievement in Motor Vehicle Tax has 
reached 53.68%. This condition is consid-
ered very good because in the PSBB con-
dition, the revenue has reached more than 
50% in the second quarter, the hope is that 
entering a new normal state, community 
activities will run as usual by paying atten-
tion to health protocols. Besides, this num-
ber is considered good because there is a 
government policy to provide relief in the 
form of a delay in payment. On the other 
hand, the revenue from motor vehicle fuel 
tax is also relatively good, namely 60.65%, 
because at the same time there are restric-
tions on population mobility that have an 
effect on reducing the use of motorized ve-
hicles, especially in Ambon City.
 From the expenditure side, up to 
the second quarter of 2020, the realization 
of the total APBD Expenditure had only 
reached 34.33%, while personnel expendi-
ture reached 40.34% (BRS Maluku, 2020). 
In the formation of GRDP, government 
consumption has increased in the second 
quarter compared to the first quarter of 
2020 by 0.17%. This means that the gov-
ernment (1) is still careful in spending the 
available funds, (2) there are operational 
barriers due to the existence of PSBB, the 
government is still focused on health is-
sues. The realization of the APBD will in-
crease along with the government’s efforts 
to drive development.
 The 2020 Regional Expenditure 
Budget (APBD) before Covid-19 is IDR 
3.37 Trillion, There has been an adjust-
ment due to Covid-19 so that the APBD be-
comes IDR 3.11 trillion, the decrease is ad-
justed to the projected decline in income. 
Expenditure realization up to the second 
quarter was Rp. 25.6%. This realization is 
still low, less than 50% where it has been in 
the 2nd quarter, this is because of the Re-
gional-Scale Social Policy and upgraded to 
Large-Scale Social Restrictions, this con-
dition hinders the refocusing process and 
the auction process for physical activities. 
The low realization of the APBD to realize 
government consumption, one of which is 
in construction services, is why the con-
struction sector experienced a very high 
contraction with growth of -5.52% in the 
first quarter also deepening in the second 
quarter.
 The target of the self-employment 
card program is given to daily workers, 
the formal sector, the informal sector and 
Micro and Small Business actors affected 
by Covid-19, as well as for Indonesian citi-
zens who are 18 years old and who are not 
attending formal education. Maluku’s high 
control span as an archipelago still has in-
ternet network constraints, therefore it is 
important to do socialization, especially for 
people who are constrained when upload-
ing their equipment needs, on government 
corridors through the Manpower Office and 
the community through social media. From 
the quota of Maluku 37,656 beneficiaries 
up to October 2020, the total who have 
registered and have received incentives 
has exceeded the quota set at 56,053 or 
Maluku Economic Recovery....... MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
118
an excess of 18,397 people.
 There are two refocusing programs 
to increase employment opportunities 
for workers affected by covid-19, namely 
the program to increase job opportunities 
aimed at creating new entrepreneurs con-
sisting of four groups with a budget value 
for four packages of Rp. 200,000,000. This 
activity has a target in Ambon City covering 
four villages (Batu Merah, Ponogoro, Wae-
haong and Galala). This program is intend-
ed for Central Maluku Regency, covering 
two villages, namely Hitu Meseng Village 
and Hila Kaitetu Village. The aim of the 
Program is to facilitate access in and out 
of plantations, as well as facilitate the mar-
keting of produce. This program involves 
workers from program villages affected by 
Covid-19, namely: workers who have been 
laid off, car drivers, fishermen, farmers, 
workers who are at home. 
 In addition to the Maluku Provin-
cial Manpower Office Program related to 
labor-intensive programs, several other 
programs run by the ministry to reduce the 
impact on the workforce are from the Min-
istry of Transportation, Ministry of PUPR, 
Ministry of KKP, and Ministry of Agriculture, 
and the highest intervention is the Ministry 
of PUPR.
 The role of the Maluku Bank Indo-
nesia Representative in the covid-19 con-
ditions on economic stability, by carrying 
out various program policies both in health 
management programs through a number 
of PPE assistance, as well as programs 
for strengthening the Economy through: 
strengthening SMEs, controlling the econ-
omy through price stability and ensuring 
strategic supply through the Team Con-
trolling Inflation so that inflation in Malu-
ku is still under control, and is still on the 
achievement target in the first quarter and 
second quarter.
 Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs), which have been supporting the 
Indonesian and regional economies, al-
most all of the UKM players experienced 
suspended animation due to the Covid-19 
pandemic. SMEs in Maluku province are 
also affected on the scale of production and 
marketing. To maintain the balance of SME 
players, the government through the role 
of the Bank Indonesia Representative of 
Maluku encourages SMEs as the real sec-
tor through digital capacity building, so that 
they are able to survive during a pandemic. 
Prior to Covid-19, BI Maluku already had 
a group of assisted SMEs, and during the 
pandemic capacity building assistance was 
further expanded through the participation 
of the general public in receiving product 
marketing digitalization training. This role 
has directly supported the Cooperative Of-
fice and UMKM. Confirmed cases that are 
still high and worsening economic condi-
tions (quarter I, II) are indi cations that the
efforts of the local government to handle 
Covid-19 while at the same time recon-
structing the regional economy still need 
to be improved. If a cartesian diagram is 
made with a quadrant, then Maluku Prov-
ince is in quadrant I, where confirmed cas-
es are increasing and economic conditions 
are still deteriorating.
Source: Document of the Directorate General of Treasury, Maluku Province October 2020
Table 2.
Realization of the Maluku Province Labor Intensive Program, as of 30 September 
2020
Maryam Sangadji, et al. MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
119
 On the other hand, the provincial 
budget allocation is to restore regional eco-
nomic conditions. It has also been carried 
out in the first and second quarters, despite 
the fact that economic growth slows down, 
the open unemployment rate rises, house-
hold consumption slows down, production 
activity stops, government consumption 
continues to slow down, poverty increases 
and others. In this case the position of Ma-
luku in the Cartesian diagram comparing 
policy and economic conditions, however, 
economic conditions continued to deterio-
rate in the second quarter.
 Taking into account the current 
conditions until October 2020, the predic-
tion of economic growth will still be in the 
same condition, experiencing a contraction 
in the third quarter due to the existence of 
PSBB in Ambon City. However, based on 
data on economic recovery programs that 
have been carried out by the central and 
regional governments until September, 
all programs have increased such as the 
Labor Intensive Program, the Pre-Employ-
ment Card, the Village Fund BLT Program, 
PKH, Basic Food Assistance, MSME As-
sistance and others in the context of En-
Figure 4.
Position of Maluku Province in Relation to Confirmed Cases and Economic Con-
ditions
Figure 5.
Position of Maluku Province in Relation to Economic Conditions and Economic 
Recovery Policies
Maluku Economic Recovery....... MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
120
couraging public consumption, provided 
that this program is managed institution-
ally by no moral hazard. So optimistically, 
it will encourage an increase in household 
consumption growth in the third quarter 
and fourth quarter. As well as an increase 
in capital expenditures, goods and person
nel expenditures will increase increasing 
government consumption, so that together 
it will increase economic growth in the third 
quarter (q to q), except for y on y a little bit 
difficult because the APBN is still minus.
 The economic recovery strategy can 
be described through the dis cussion in the
Table 3.
Strategy for Economic Recovery during the Pandemic and Entering the New Nor-
mal Era in Maluku
Maryam Sangadji, et al. MediaTrend 16 (1) 2021 p. 110-121
121
previous sub-chapter, so that it can provide 
direction for the strategy to be carried out 
by considering the results of the research 
which shows the economic conditions of 
Maluku in the first and second quarters, 
then the recovery strategies that can be 
carried out in appendix
CONCLUSIONS
 Based on the results of the above 
research analysis, it can be concluded 
that of the 17 sectors, there are 13 sec-
tors experiencing contraction in economic 
growth. although government consumption 
experienced positive growth in the sec-
ond quarter, it did not necessarily increase 
economic growth in general in the second 
quarter, because at the same time house-
hold consumption experienced a deeper 
contraction.
 The number of unemployed con-
tinues to increase with the increase in the 
number of layoffs and workers who are laid 
off. The efforts of the local government by 
issuing various policies are very maximal 
in breaking the chain of transmission, the 
number which has increased in the second 
quarter and after the second quarter, prov-
ing that: (a) the level of public awareness 
is still low in obeying the Health protocol; 
(b) there is a mass effort by the govern-
ment through tracking, swab, and finding 
OTG; (c) the high level of public apathy to-
wards the Health protocol due to informa-
tion asymmetry that creates distrust in the 
handling of the impact of Covid-19 by the 
local government
 The longer the effort to deal with 
the chain of transmission through PSBB, 
the more it will have an impact on the Ma-
luku economy, seen in the second quarter. 
However, by demonstrating the central 
government’s policies through (PEN) and 
local governments in economic recovery, 
optimism for economic growth will increase 
from the second quarter, assuming that in-
stitutionally it is well-managed. The eco-
nomic recovery strategy can be carried out 
through five activities in 2020 in the third to 
fourth quarters and in 2021.
REFERENCE
Bank Indonesia: Sinergi Kebijakan Pemu-
lihan Ekonomi Nasional di Era Kenor-
malan Baru. Materi Diskusi Publik, 22 
Agustus, 2020
BRS Provinsi Maluku, 2020
Bappeda Provinsi Maluku, Dokumen Hasil 
Penelitian, 2020
Direktorat jenderal Perbendaharaan Provinsi 
Maluku, 2020. Dokumen Press Release
Dokumen Dinastenagakerja Provinsi Ma-
luku, 2020
Dokumen Dinas Pariwisata Provinsi Maluku, 
2020
Yehezkel .ht tps: / /www.satumaluku.
id/2020/04/25/banyak-pekerja-swasta-
di-maluku-dirumahkan-menteri-tenaga-
kerja-sebut-2-juta-pekerja-kena-phk/),
https://rri.co.id/ambon/ekonomi/839156/bi-
maluku-dorong-umkm-tetap-bertahan-
ditengah-tekanan-covid-19
h t t p s : / / e k o n o m i . b i s n i s . c o m /
read/20200722/9/1269901/dampak-
covid-19-ke-ukm-16-%-pelaku-usaha-
pangkas-karyawan
https://www.gstatic.com/covid19/mobil-
ity/2020-08-17_ID_Mobility_Re-
port_id.pdfS
