Transformation of the economic system of Republic of Srpska and its adaptation to global processes

www.ssoar.info
Transformation of the economic system of Republic
of Srpska and its adaptation to global processes
Mastilo, Zoran
Veröffentlichungsversion / Published Version
Zeitschriftenartikel / journal article
Empfohlene Zitierung / Suggested Citation:
Mastilo, Z. (2015). Transformation of the economic system of Republic of Srpska and its adaptation to global
processes. International Letters of Social and Humanistic Sciences, 56, 152-162. https://doi.org/10.18052/
www.scipress.com/ILSHS.56.152
Nutzungsbedingungen:
Dieser Text wird unter einer CC BY Lizenz (Namensnennung) zur
Verfügung gestellt. Nähere Auskünfte zu den CC-Lizenzen finden
Sie hier:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.de
Terms of use:
This document is made available under a CC BY Licence
(Attribution). For more Information see:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0
TRANSFORMATION OF THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM OF REPUBLIC OF 
SRPSKA AND ITS ADAPTATION TO GLOBAL PROCESSES 
Zoran Mastilo 
Univerzitet u Istočnom Sarajevu, Fakultet Poslovne Ekonomije Bijeljina, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
E-mail address: zoran.mastilo@fpe.unssa.rs.ba 
Keywords: economic system, globalization, unemployment, debt, deficit, transformation, 
development, economic growth rate, integration, and communication technology. 
ABSTRACT. Republic of Srpska cannot boast of its economic system ever since the onset of the 
Global Economic and Financial Crisis (2008) to this day. Global Economic and Financial Crisis has 
produced negative effects onto a small economy like the economy of the Republic of Srpska (RS). 
In times of such crisis, RS has been faced with high unemployment rate (44%), reduced industrial 
production, enormous public debt, high deficits and colossal illiquidity. It indicates that the 
Republic of Srpska is characterised by poor macroeconomic indicators. The fact that RS possesses 
rich and diverse natural resources, which should be a key factor in its present and future 
development, did not help the economic system of RS in any way. The industry has been designated 
as a major segment of development by a long-term strategy of socio-economic development. Such 
long-term strategy has not given any results in terms of positive rate of economic growth, nor even 
the slightest improvement of any of the macroeconomic indicators so far. Urgent transformation of 
the economic system of the Republic of Srpska and its adaptation to the global processes is more 
than necessary. This can be achieved by offering investors numerous benefits and opportunities for 
investment under very favourable conditions, particularly in the industries and sectors representing 
significant natural resources. First of all, it is believed that there is great potential for the 
development of agriculture; exceptionally favourable conditions for the development of thermal and 
hydro energy sector; numerous possibilities of providing energy from renewable sources; vast areas 
covered by forests, mining and mineral resources; great tourist potential, etc. The above listed items 
are the essential ones, although there are others, which can represent a good basis for development 
of the economic system. Transformation of the economic system of RS will depend on many 
factors, primarily, of globalization that has contributed to the huge increase in trade, as well as of 
modern communication technologies. Globalisation has both positive and negative aspects, but it 
has certainly brought significant changes. The developed world is the bearer of the globalization 
process and it made the best use of current global circumstances. The solution is in creation of 
economic and political integrations, being in a cause-effect relationship with the process of 
globalization. Economic system of the Republic of Srpska simply has to be included in the such 
integrations. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The global economic and financial crisis, created in 2008, is considered the largest world-
wide crisis since the Second World War to this day. Experience from the Great Depression in the 
1930s, demonstrated that a much smaller crisis propelled the governments of developed countries to 
undertake appropriate measures to mitigate the crisis and to minimize its negative effects. The 
economy starts to recoverin cyclical periods in certain quarters, thus providing us with the 
impression that it is emerging from the crisis. There are quarters which recorded positive rates of 
economic growth, as well as there are those with negative growth rates within the same year. 
Through analysis of such situation in the economy of the Republic of Srpska and Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, it can be said, as proposed by Jurcic (2009), that "the W-shaped great crisis „has a 
negative impact on economic activity, as well as on human life (p.738). The economy of Republic 
of Srpska is characterized by a consumption which is higher than production, by imports greater 
International Letters of Social and Humanistic Sciences Online: 2015-07-17
ISSN: 2300-2697, Vol. 56, pp 152-162
doi:10.18052/www.scipress.com/ILSHS.56.152
© 2015 SciPress Ltd., Switzerland
SciPress applies the CC-BY 4.0 license to works we publish: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
than exports, high foreign debt, constant loss of competitiveness, significant unemployment. The 
overall indicator of economic trends in the Republic of Srpska and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) 
results in, or is measured through the growth of Gross Domestic Product (GDP).  To be more 
specific, the real GDP of the Republic of Srpska in 2008 amounted to the growth rate of 6.3% when 
compared to 2007, while it faced a negative growth rate of 3.0%in 2009. Further analysis shows 
that GDP had positive growth in 2010 and 2011, but negative growth in 2012. Coverage of imports 
by exports still remains on an extremely low level, given that most products are imported as a result 
of reduced domestic production. Thus, the economic system of the Republic of Srpska (RS) has not 
yet recovered from the negative effects of the crisis. Therefore, it is essential to transform the 
economic system of the Republic of Srpska and adapt it to global processes. It is necessary to define 
the goals of economic policy, such as: increase of domestic production and competitiveness, 
increase of employment, increase of exports and ensuring balanced regional development. In 
accordance with the set objectives, it is necessary to define the measures and instruments of 
economic policy, followed by organizing the administration in accordance with the goals in order 
for them to be accomplished. The first step in transforming the economic system of the RS is the 
creation of a competitive macroeconomic environment. 
2. ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC SYSTEM OF REPUBLIC OF SRPSKA IN CRISIS 
PERIOD 
The Republic of Srpska faced production stagnation even before the global economic and 
financial crisis. In times of crisis, such stagnation has been even more pronounced, especially in 
2009, resulting in a negative growth rate of GDP, although a slight positive growth had been 
registered in 2010 and 2011, which by itself says much about the economic system of the Republic 
of Srpska. However, industrial production declined in 2012, resulting in a negative rate of economic 
growth. Negative economic growth rates in the reporting period are not the only unfavourable 
indicator of the economic system of the Republic of Srpska. Another very significant factor which 
should be noted is the enormous unemployment rate of 44%, the highest in the region. In addition to 
the above indicators, the economic system of the Republic of Srpska is characterized by public 
spending that exceeds production, imports that exceed exports, high foreign debt, and permanent 
loss of competitiveness which certainly are major problems in the selective international 
markets.The above significantly reduces the aggregate (foreign) demand (AD) which is why the 
economic system of the Republic of Srpska remained undeveloped and underdeveloped, which 
most certainly adversely affects the standard of the citizens and their life in the area. 
Table 1: Changes in the Republic of Srpska GDP in the period 2007 – 2013 
Indicator / year 
 
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
nominal GDP 
 
7,352.00 8,490.60 8,236.30 8,318.20 8,682-40 8,584.97 8,760.80 
GDP, nominal 
growth rate (in %) 
 
12.30 15.50 -3.00 1.00 4.40 -1.10 2.00 
Real GDP growth (in 
%) 
 
6.60 6.30 -3.00 0.80 0.80 -1.10 1.90 
GDP per capita (in 
BAM) 
 
5,107.00 5,907.00 5,739,00 5,805.00 6,073.00 6,006.00 6,146.00 
INDUSTRY TOTAL  16.8% 19.0% 5.0% 4.7% -4.2% 4.1% 
Source: www.irbrs.net 
"According to the Labour Force Survey from 2013, the unemployment rate in BiH amounted to 
27.50% which is significantly lower than the actually registered unemployment rate of 44.60%. 
From 2008 to 2012, unemployment rate rose steadily, as a result of economic crisis, only to be 
International Letters of Social and Humanistic Sciences Vol. 56 153
decreased by 0.5% in 2013, in comparison to the year 2012, but still 4.1% higher compared to 
2008"(Mastilo, 2014). 
At the same time, the employment rate in the reporting period decreased from year to year, which is 
certainly unfavourable macroeconomic indicator for Bosnia and Herzegovina; in 2013 it amounted 
to 31.6%, which is 2% less than in 2008. The analysis shows that less than half of the working age 
population over 15 years of age in BiH is active (43.6%), including notable differences between the 
genders (men 62%, women 38%). When comparing the above information with the international 
standards, it is clear that the activity rate of 43.6% in 2013 is extremely low. 
 
Table 2: Export and Import trends in the period of 2007 – 2013 
 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
Exports of 
goods (in 
million 
BAM) 
1,671.60 1,921.80 1,672.90 2,177.80 2,561.90 2,374.30 2,588.10 
Imports 
(in million 
BAM) 
3,347.90 4,142.30 3,567.10 4,.053.10 4,584.20 4,487.50 4,551.60 
Export-
import 
ratio (in 
%) 
49.90 46.40 46.90 53.70 55.90 52.90 56.90 
Share of 
exports in 
GDP 
22.70 22.60 20.30 26.,20 29.50 27.60 29.50 
Source: www.irbrs.net 
The share of export in GDP of the Republic of Srpska in 2011 and 2013 was higher compared to 
other years and amounts to 29.50%, which is certainly insufficient but still higher when compared 
to the years of 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2012. Most of the demand comes from the domestic 
market; a decline in aggregate demand in the world market affects the decrease in domestic 
demand, which represents a serious problem for the economic system of the Republic of Srpska. 
The decrease in export has resulted in fewer adverse effects compared to the negative effects 
incurred by the reduction in domestic demand. The key macroeconomic problem of the economy of 
the Republic of Srpska is that its domestic consumption overcomes its production, resulting in 
imports exceeding the exports, thus increasing the deficit on the current account of the balance of 
payments. 
COMPETITIVENESS as important segment of economy OF REPUBLIC of SRPSKA  
According toJurčić (2009), "A country's competitiveness represents its ability to produce goods and 
services which satisfy the criteria of the world market and to export such goods under the conditions 
of world competition, while maintaining or increasing living standards of its citizens" (p. 746). 
Whether a country is competitive or not is contained in the analysis performed in various ways. One 
of the simplest methods would be to analyse the trends of the indicators of a country's share of 
exports in total world exports or export of a group of countries within a certain period. Such 
analysis has revealed the country's ability to produce certain goods that fulfilthe criteria of the world 
market. Likewise, the country's ability to maintain or increase its national income through export is 
154 Volume 56
required to maintain or improvethe living standard of its citizens, and is viewed by analysis of 
export goods according to their added value. 
"The total volume of foreign trade of the Republic of Srpska for the period from January to 
December 2014 amounted to 7.64 billion BAM, which actually represents an increase of 500.53 
million BAM or 7.0% in comparison to the same period of 2013. Export value amounted to 2.69 
billion BAM, which is an increase of 105.95 million BAM or 4.1% as compared to the same period 
in 2013. Actual import in the period from January to December 2014 amounted to 4.95 billion 
BAM, an increase of 394.6 million BAM, or 8.7% when compared to the same period last year. 
Foreign trade deficit amounted to 2.25 billion, while it amounted to 1.9 billion KM in the same 
period of 2013. Import - export coverage amounted to 54.5%, while it amounted to about 56.9% in 
the same period last year "(Information on economic trends in the period from Januaryto December 
2014, p.3). Theabove dataindicate that 2014 was marked by higher exportssimultaneously 
increasing deficit due to a higher increase in imports compared to the increase in exports. 
Accordingly, all efforts should be focused on increasing domestic production and improving 
product quality, with the aim of increasing exports and reducing imports, thus lowering the deficit. 
However, a problem is more than evident, since the same import-export trends have been registered 
in the Republic of Srpska, which indicated that it would not be possible to achieve higher exports 
without increasing imports at the same time, since most of the necessary inputs are provided via 
international markets. 
Table 3: Export - import coverage classified by economic groups of countries 
 I-XII 2013 I-XII 2014 
total 57% 54% 
EU-28 101% 96% 
EFTA countries 408% 374% 
Other developed countries 29% 28% 
CEFTA countries 71% 65% 
Developing countries 2% 3% 
Source: Information on economic trends in RS from January to December 2014, 2015, Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry of Republika Srpska, p. 19 
The table indicates that the Republic of Srpska export-import coverage is higher in comparison to 
developing countries and other developed countries. The highest export-import coverage is present 
in EFTA countries (Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Switzerland), with the Republic of Srpska 
being far from such result. 
One of the indicatorssuggesting a drop in competitiveness and in the possibility of maintaining or 
improving citizen standard is the reduction of the share of industrial products which are more 
complex and characterized by higher added value. It should be noted that the export 
competitiveness is of particular importance for small countries such as the Republic of Srpska, one 
of the two entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a rule, small countries have higher import 
dependence and imports should be recompensated through exports. As quoted by Jurčić, (2009) 
"Since imports in a small country increases in line with the increase in domestic demand and 
exceeds 60% or more of domestic consumption, it is necessary for the purpose of maintaining 
stability of the domestic economy, create conditions for the corresponding or even higher export 
through its economic policies " (p. 746). Therefore, the economic policy of the Republic 
Srpskashould be properly defined to ensure the export of complex products, thus reducing the trade 
deficit. 
International Letters of Social and Humanistic Sciences Vol. 56 155
According to the results published by the World Bank ("Doing Business 2015"), Bosnia and 
Herzegovina has been ranked as 107
th
,meaning that it moved up the level by twenty-four ranks 
when compared to the previous year 2013. 
 
Table 4: Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Economy Overview Ranking (Doing Business) 
Topics DB 2015 DB 2014 DB 2013 DB 2012 
Change in 
rank 
compared to 
the 2011. 
Starting a Business 147 174 162 162 - 15 
Dealing with 
Construction Permits 
182 175 163 163 + 19 
GettingElectricity 163 164 158 157            +  6 
Registering property  88   96    93 100 - 12 
Getting Credit  36   73   70   67 - 31 
Protecting Minority 
Investors 
 83 115 100   97 - 14 
Paying taxes 151 135 128 110 + 41 
Trading across borders  104 107 103 108 -   4 
Enforcing Contracts   95 115 120 125 - 30 
Resolving insolvency   34   77    83   80 - 46 
Total 107 131 126 125 - 18 
Source: Doing Business (2015, 2014, 2013, 2012) World Bank. 
Progress has been made in the registration of business entities, with the objective of 
simplifyingprocedures for the reporting and payment of taxes and contributions for employees 
(unified system of registration, control and collection of contributions). The idea is to facilitate and 
expedite obtaining investment loans for investment in infrastructure projects, which aim to create 
new values and new jobs, strengthen overall security and protection of investors and the timely 
resolution of insolvency. Comparing the quality of the business environment, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina and its entities are lagging behind other countries in the region, for example. 
Macedonia is ranked as 30
th
, Montenegro 36
th
, Slovenia 51
st
, Hungary 54
th
, Croatia 65
th
, Serbia 91
st
. 
Based on the above data it can be said that it is necessary to significantly improve guarantees for 
political and economic security, facilitate obtaining construction permits, improve registration of 
property and improve trading across borders, all for the purpose of improving the quality of the 
business environment. By grasping all the said problems that have been present for many years, it is 
clear that some effort has been made, but the positive effects are not yet measurable. 
Another crucial matter regarding the above issues is the exchange rate, which is the most powerful 
instrument of economic policy. Its significance is even greater for small, open countries that 
naturally have high import dependence. The exchange rate defines the export -import price ratio, 
defines relative prices. Defining the exchange rate level affects the prices of imported goods in the 
domestic market and the prices of domestic goods in foreign markets. 
156 Volume 56
3. ADAPTATION OF THE SYSTEM OF RS TO GLOBAL PROCESSES 
Thanks to globalization, relations between people and countries are becoming more intense, 
where people are starting to think globally and to differently understand the world in general. 
According to Turek, globalization means a social process that tends to universality and unity of the 
world (as cited in Lončar, 2005, p.92). 
Globalization has certain requirements: continuous investment into knowledge, technologies, 
research and development. When one starts to fall behind in the globalization process or fails to 
become incorporated into contemporary processes, it finds itself significantly lagging behind. 
Today's world has become increasingly "open" and "compacted“, thus creating the well-known 
saying about the world beinga "global village". Robertson believes that "globalization as a concept 
refers to "compacting“ of the world, but also to raising awareness about the world as a whole" (as 
cited in Lončar, 2005, p 92). 
It can be argued that globalization is a result of the development of knowledge, modern 
technologies, market economy and democracy. Globalization has enabled free movement of capital, 
goods, information and people through the dissemination and the abolition of borders. 
Environmental, cultural and social side of globalization is often disregarded in relation to its 
political and economic dimension. 
The process of globalization has brought an increased influence and power of multinational 
corporations. Many countries in which such corporations are doing business, particularly small and 
poor countries, are often treated as their subsidiaries in financial terms, due to huge financial 
resources of multinational corporations. 
GDP of these countries cannot be even remotely comparedto the profits of such corporations. 
Multinational corporations, however, spread their influence and power onto all countries. 
Nocountry can avoid "global search". Investment decisions of corporations are made on a global 
scale by transferring capital or resources from one country to another, thus affecting the 
(un)employment of millions of people and the level of economic activity in certain countries. 
Globalization is a process that has begun and that cannot be stopped. Today, globalization is seen as 
a world without borders. Everything that is created begins to reflect globally. So today there are 
global products, fashion, consumers and even global citizens. Therefore, globalization can even be 
understood as a civilization stage. 
Nowadays, the concern about the negative consequences of globalization is not being hidden 
anymore, but there are also positive sides of such process, embodied acknowledge development, 
better health care, higher food production and, in general, greater cohesion among people. 
"Globalization has started processes presentthroughout the world. Interconnection and globalization 
of national systems and financial markets influenced the great vulnerability of the world's total 
economy. Therefore, all the world's capital markets reacted very quickly when a breakdown of 
"Asian miracle" occurred, followed by the collapse of the Russian system. That year, all 
international stock market indices have sharply dropped, causing a major slowdown in the world 
GDP "(NJAVRO mentioned in Lončar, 2005, p. 103). 
Contemporary economic flows in the world economy and particularly developments regarding 
regional integration are becoming more dynamic and forward focused by coordinating economic 
policy in international economic regional integration. The scientific and technical revolution has 
assigned the technological factor as the most essential driver of economic development and 
launched a strong process of re-industrialization of the developed Western countries. Under such 
conditions, with increasing interdependence of national economies and with the increasing demand 
of resisting the American and Japanese competition (particularly in high-tech areas) the process of 
forming a single internal market of the EU or the European Economic Area has almost been 
International Letters of Social and Humanistic Sciences Vol. 56 157
completed. The process of globalization, primarily owing to advances of funds of Transport and 
Communications, has turned theplanet into a global village. Enormous opportunities have been 
made thanks to the division of labour and comparative advantages of different countries. 
Standardization is the essence of the globalization of production and trade process. Mere acceptance 
of standards does not imply that the barriers to their full and effective implementation in all 
countries have completely disappeared. 
Forming the European Economic Area is an ongoing process, but one gaining momentum. It is 
certain that, once such market becomes truly unique, all those present will be faced with a much 
more intense competition than before, which is likely to cause many to lose ground in such 
competitive game. Creating a single European area will increase the productivity of labour and the 
internal division of labour in the countries of the EPP, which will further strengthen European 
international enterprises in the manufacturing, technological and marketing sense. 
Thus, European changes provide companies a better chance, which is where the economic system of 
the Republic of Srpska also belongs, but they simultaneously warn that such companies shall bear 
even greater consequences for any failures and improper business conduct. 
Globalization has penetrated into every aspect of our lives that is to say, according to the IMF, it 
marks a rapid integration of the economy around the globe, primarily through trade, financial flows, 
exchange of technology, information network and cross-cultural and historical heritage. 
However, the major drawback of globalization is that not all countries have benefited from it, but 
have also suffered losses, particularly those countries that were against globalization. This becomes 
even more evident when referring to the countries that have accepted globalization, thus being faced 
with the problem of trade liberalization, which to this day has not even thebasic elements of fair 
play. Still, rich countries impose barriers to imports of agricultural and textile products, primary raw 
materials, shoes, etc. from underdeveloped countries; A situation where more powerful countries 
have a comparative advantage. These barriers or import bans cost developing countries over 100 
billion euro per year, which is more than twice the total aid these countries receive. 
Globalization is a final stage of integration of world-wide markets. 
4. THE GREAT TRANSFORMATION 
The Republic of Srpska, as an entity within Bosnia and Herzegovina undergoing the long-
lasting transition process, is facing inadequate economic policy which cannot accomplish defined 
goals. Hence derives the need for significant and rapid transformation of the overall economic and 
political system of the Republic of Srpska. Situation in the Republic of Srpska points to the fact that 
it is no longer worthwhile to produce and export, although those segments were already at a very 
low level. Such situationhas not been caused by the mentality of the people, but by the unfavourable 
conditions caused by poor politic decisions. Great Transformation implies a change in the approach 
towards work and politics. In economic terms, this means abandoning existing schools of economic 
thought and its ways of perceiving and solving economic problems. Therefore, one must abandon 
neo-liberal economic concept and its school of thought, and replace them by those which can 
resolve the accumulated economic problems in the society. It is not an easy process, but it will 
certainly last for a longer period. 
It is imperative to create such conditions that would enable practical work, production, export and 
employment. The first step would be to determine proper economic policy goals: to increase 
domestic production and to be competitive;to stimulate employment and exports; to establish a 
balanced regional development. It is necessary todefine measures and instruments of economic 
policy in line with these objectives, as well as to organize the civil administration in line with the 
objectives, measures and instruments. The creation of a competitive macroeconomic environment is 
the first step of economic policy undergoing the great transformation. The capital required for 
158 Volume 56
transformation is, above all, present in our own experience caused by wrong policy and derived 
from historical experience of others inform numerous similar situations. Our country entered the 
process of transition twenty years ago with higher national (liquid) capital, and lower indebtedness. 
However, today, when we are facing the challenges of the great transformation, the situation is 
completely reversed and much more severe: less capital, but with high indebtedness, which is why 
the challenge is greater. 
For great transformation, which is absolutely necessary, the basis is in natural resources and 
geopolitical position of the Republic of Srpska. Instead of taking loans on international financial 
markets, it would be cheaper and better to use our natural resources (land, water, mineral resources, 
forests, energy) and convert them into competitive products. According to Jurčić (2009), " it 
requires organized policy, namely: the answer what to do, what to live off and are how are we to 
develop?" (p. 751). The answers to these questions should be sought in new policies, primarily in 
the industrialsector, inreindustrialization and in the fiscal, monetary, regional development policy, 
social policy and all other policies that can contribute to the recovery of the economic system of the 
Republic of Srpska. 
4.1. INDUSTRIAL POLICY 
Industrial policy is considered a key policy. Ifthe reindustrialization is added as a defined objective 
which should contribute to the recovery of the economic system of the Republic of Srpska, it can be 
rightfullysaid that it would contribute to increased domestic production. All this can be achieved by 
working in sectors where there are unused resources and unutilized capacities lacking infrastructure, 
as well as educated and skilled workforce. 
An integral part of industrial policy and the policy of re-industrialization is the technological 
development policy, which cannot be performed without education policy. Both technology and 
education are production inputs, which is why their policies are derived from industrial policy. The 
policy which seeks to employ all production resources in the sectors in which to obtain the highest 
added value and increase the rate of employment must create the conditions and build physical and 
institutional infrastructure for new activities in which the production resources result in even greater 
added value. The task is also to ensure painless shutdown of "old" industries and provide support to 
the new ones. So far, there will hardly be any new industries if there were not foreign investors who 
would come to our region and invest their capital, thus boosting development. Republic of Srpska is 
a suitable place for such action as there are untapped opportunities in all economic activities, 
especially in power, agriculture and civil sector. Greater exploitation of these opportunities enables 
increasing domestic production and employment, reduction of import and creation of conditions for 
increased exports. Competitiveness must be protected and encouraged through market competition 
and by protection from monopolistic behaviour. This policy is a great chance for recovery of the 
economic system of the Republic of Srpska. 
4.2. REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT POLICY 
Mastilo and Rajak (2013) considered that "it is necessary to devise a modern regional policy, 
dictated by the requirements of the latest information and telecommunication technologies that are 
based on self-sufficiency and integration into the various networks" (p. 378). Each activity takes 
place at a location of a region. Regional development policies substantially provide the conditions 
for better development activities and balanced development of the entire area of the Republic of 
Srpska. So far, little attention has been paid to such issue, causing some parts to be almost 
completely neglected, while some regions experienced huge economic benefits at the expense of 
others. Therefore, the industrial policy and re-industrialization are in close contact with the regional 
development policy. Many activities related to natural resources are the basis for the development 
of the region. Likewise, activities that have evolved in the past and for which there is a physical and 
institutional infrastructure and education in certain regions, are the fastest to develop in those 
regions. Such actions are recognizable in developed country and any suchcountries locate the 
International Letters of Social and Humanistic Sciences Vol. 56 159
production and group related production using such model, thus forming clusters. That way, the 
policy of balanced regional development is observed, thus reducing the production and institutional 
costs, contributing to the development of new products and new technologies. Balanced regional 
development provides not only economic but also political, social and any other stability. 
4.3. STATE ADMINISTRATION 
Implementation of economic policy requires that the administration is organized in accordance with 
its own objectives. The complexity of a state organization must be in accordance with the 
complexity of the structure of the economy and the complexity of products produced with the 
technology used and the markets it is sold in. Administrative capacity of a country is increased not 
only through physical increase but also by increasing knowledge of its units. Therefore, the 
appropriate forms of organization in compliancewith the needs of economic development are 
indispensable. They usually range from scientific institutes,specialized agencies, departments, 
directorates to services. Any part of economic activity, or any part of the business process must be 
supported by an appropriate unit within the administration of the state. Creating conditions for new 
activities depends solely on the administrative capacity of the state, i.e. the ability of the state to 
create such conditions. 
4.4. FISCAL POLICY 
Fiscal policy refers to government spending and the tax system. Fiscal policy represents the most 
direct method to stimulate or discourage economic activity. Reducing government spending affects 
the decline in demand for goods or services. Similarly, increasing the tax rate reduces the current 
consumer income, leading to a rapid decline in consumption. Imperative is to focus on development 
primarily on the basis of domestic revenue, at least when it comes to public spending. No expensive 
loans should be used for resolving issues of salaries and pensions in the Republic of Srpska. 
Credit debt should be utilized only in case of major infrastructure projects that will contribute to 
economic growth and rising employment, which is only reasonable solution. 
Impact of fiscal policy is felt almost immediately; Defining such policyis so complex that it cannot 
be used in practice for fine economy adjustments. The reduction of tax burdens can contribute to 
increasing investment in our region and encourage employees to work, which would certainly 
stimulate economic growth. 
The aggregate impact of government fiscal policy is determined by the budget surplus or deficit, i.e. 
on the basis ofthe difference between government revenues and expenditures. A large deficit means 
that the government spends much more than it collects through taxes. The key is to bypass the 
policies of the IMF, not allowing their expensive loans to become key revenue for budgetsof 
transition countries, including Bosnia and Herzegovina and its entities. 
4.5. MONETARY POLICY 
Republic of Srpska has no sovereignty when referring to its monetary policy. Unfortunately, neither 
does BiH, since the Central Bank of BiH is managedby the currency board, as in hardly any other 
country. 
Only one more country in South East Europe has a currency board and faces the same problems as 
BiH. Therefore, our monetary system and monetary authoritiesare in the hands of others. We are to 
struggle for new solutions that move towards the sovereign monetary policy at the state level in 
order to enhance economic growth and achieve positive growth rates through Central Bank of BiH. 
Consequently, monetary policy needs to be expansionary, but not too much, yet not restrictive at all. 
Its aim should be to assist ailing BiH economy through its placements. 
160 Volume 56
Monetary policy certainly has to contribute to production and employment increase without 
neglecting its main task - price stability. Industrial, fiscal and monetary policy, in terms of 
economic and financial crisis should be more interdependent in order to mitigate the negative 
effects of the crisis. 
5. CONCLUSION 
It is necessary to transform the economic system In of the Republic of Srpska and adapt it to 
global processes. It is the main reason why it is no longer reasonable to work and produce in the 
Republic of Srpska. that the facts speaking in favour of such claims are reflected in negative GDP 
growth rates, high unemployment, very high import-export ration. All the above demonstrates that 
the current economic policy is inadequate, that it favours pro-recession development and that it does 
not contribute to the achievement of defined objectives. This economic policy has very adverse and 
negative results. Therefore, it is necessary to formulate the direction of further development, as well 
as all other policies. It is primarily necessary to precisely define the objectives, as well as to define 
appropriate public policies and instruments for achievement of the established goals. The economic 
system of the Republic of Srpska, if it is to recover, has no other choice but to demonstrate 
willingness to accept investments, new ideas and to adapt to the global processes for the sake of 
raising the living standards of its citizens. It should be adapted to modern conditions and trends, 
such as globalization, that are present throughout the world and in the area where we live. 
Therefore, active participation should be made with the international economic trends and the 
international division of labour. It is necessary to have a certain competitive advantage in the 
process of active participatingin the international market in order to achieve positive results or an 
appropriate development level. In fact, in the process of participating at the international (global) 
market, the companies face increasingly harsh global competition. Due to the high unemployment 
rate, it is necessary to synchronize the current education system with the labour market demand. 
The problems for the Republic of Srpska are lack of recognizable final export production, as well as 
lack of comparative advantages that would strengthen its position at the international market. The 
relatively high concentration export ratio is unfortunately a consequence of the high percentage of 
basic raw product groups (metal ore, alumina, paper, wood, electricity), but also a consequence of 
modest production potential and their export. The Republic of Srpska urges for new investments in 
processing facilities which are export-oriented, which would certainly have a significant impact on 
GDP growth and reduce the enormous unemployment ration, , primarily, reducingthe 
unemployment of highly educated young staff. Nowadays, a high unemployment level of young 
people represents a dire issue in the Republic of Srpska. In other words, large-scale industrial 
investments would determine the direction and extent of future development, which would certainly 
increase the export of Republic of Srpska. The economic system of the Republic of Srpska must 
overcome the problem of the existing discrepancies between the domestic economy and the 
international trends and export flows. It is imperative to stimulate domestic entrepreneurial 
knowledge and skills that would economically and politically encourage the inflow of foreign direct 
investments (including the creation of conditions for the opening production-oriented branches of 
multinational companies focused onto the EU market), all of which can be a significant driving 
force for much needed economic recovery of the Republic of Srpska. 
 
 
 
 
International Letters of Social and Humanistic Sciences Vol. 56 161
References 
[1] GlavniekonomskiindikatoriRepublikeSrpske, downloaded on 23 February, 2015 from: 
http://www.irbrs.net/statistika/Indikatori.aspx?tab=2&lang=ci 
[2] Jurčić, Lj. (2009). Hrvatska: Velikatransformacija. Ekonomski pregled, 60 (12), 738-
753.Downloaded on 10February , 2015. from  
http://hrcak.srce.hr/index.php?show=clanak&id_clanak_jezik=73416 
[3] Lončar, J. (2005). Globalizacija, pojam, nastanak i trendovirazvoja. Downloaded on 10 
February, 2015 from http://hrcak.srce.hr/index.php?show=clanak&id_clanak_jezik=14812 
[4] Mastilo, Z., and Rajak, A. (2013) .Regionalnirazvoj Republike Srpske i Bosne i Hercegovine. 
Ekonomskividici, XVIII (2), 371-380. 
[5] Mastilo Z. (2014). Analiza struktur enezaposlenosti visokoobrazovanih kadrova u Republici 
Srpskoj i mjere za njezinosmanjenje. Paper presented on a scientific conference Jahorina 
Business Days, February 2015, Jahorina. 
[6] PrivrednakomoraRepublikeSrpske (2015). Informacije o privrednim kretanjima u Republici 
Srpskojza period januar-decembar 2014. godine. Downloaded on 15 february, 2015 from 
Privrednakomora RS:  
http://www.komorars.ba/pkrs//upload/Informacija%20o%20privrednim%20kretanjima%20I-
XII%202014.pdf 
[7] The World Bank, (2015, 2014, 2013, 2012) Doing business. Downloaded on 3 March, 
2015.from 
http://www.doingbusiness.org/~/media/GIAWB/Doing%20Business/Documents/Annual-
Reports/English/DB15-Full-Report.pdf  
[8] Vesić, D. (2010). Uticaj globalizacije poslovanja na privredni sistem Srbije.Downloaded on 15 
February, 2015 from  
http://www.doiserbia.nb.rs/img/doi/0025-8555/2010/0025-85551001136V.pdf 
162 Volume 56
