The School Readiness Analysis in 2021/2022 Academic Year Amid  Covid-19 Pandemic Based on The Regional Economic Resilience in Salatiga

91 
 
The School Readiness Analysis in 2021/2022 Academic Year Amid  
Covid-19 Pandemic Based on The Regional Economic Resilience in Salatiga 
 
Sri Sulandjari 
sri.sulandjari@uksw.edu  
Fakultas Ekonomika dan Bisnis, Universitas Kristen Satya Wacana, Salatiga 
 
ABSTRACT 
The Covid-19 pandemic is devastating people’s general income. It also affects the 
education sector. The government attempted to create an infrastructure as a solution to reduce 
the pandemic's impact. Economic resilience is a factor that shows the economic resources 
resilience in the midst of problems. Therefore, to understand the readiness level of people in 
Salatiga when welcoming the ‘new normal’ from WFH-online to offline activities, we use the 
economic resilience factors as indicators. Based on the research, it was found that Salatiga is 
gradually improving oneself to make the ‘new normal’ agenda succeed. This happens because 
Salatiga economic has decreased yet still afford for recovery. 
 
Keywords: Economic Resilience, Education, Impact of Pandemic, Progressive Analysis of 
Acro-economic, SMEs 
 
Article Info 
Received date: 11 April 2021 Revised date: 30 April 2021 Accepted date: 19 Mei 2021 
 
INTRODUCTION 
UN understands the idea of human development as giving freedom for choosing the value for 
whom he/she believes. Human development is not viewed as a project that spreads Western culture but 
simply as a moral building capacity to develop both human resources and the nation's goal of 
productivities (Drewery, 2011). Aspect psychology of human nature tends to believe about something 
good or beneficial. If it is well-rooted deep inside his/her feeling, this belief can be stated as a value. To 
do so, humans must have achieved a certain level of consciousness because belief only can be trust if 
this already has evidence (Noor & Hussain, 2014). A nation's growth can be seen from human 
development because it has two realms: people for increasing living standards and opportunities for a 
suitable environment to live his life. This can be stated in the UN's two schemes regarding directly 
enhancing human abilities and creating an environment or conditions for human development (Paliova 
et al., 2019).  
Enhancing capabilities required knowledge to develop their capacities. This framework can be 
achieved only by honing it optimally through learning and leadership. The Indonesian Government has 
already organized it into regulation. A president of Indonesia, Joko Widodo put it into the nation's goal 
"Nawacita" as a part of human development, consisting of mental revolution, education, health, and 
housing. The implementation of education is the Indonesian mandate of the 1945 Constitution in 
Articles 32, 31, and 28, where these articles aim to educate the nation's life. This expansion of 
understanding allows this Law not to limit attention to teaching alone but also to pay attention to 
educational elements related to the growth of the Indonesian human personality which together are the 
manifestation of the Indonesian nation. This nation is devoted to God Almighty, nurturing morality. 
humanitarian character and upholding the people's noble moral ideals, as referred to in the Decree of 
the People's Consultative Assembly of the Republic of Indonesia Number II / MPR / 1978 concerning 
Guidelines for the Living and Practicing of Pancasila (Ekaprasetia Pancakarsa). With this premise, 
national education is structured as a conscious effort to enable the Indonesian nation to sustain its life 
and develop itself continuously (Kementrian-Pendidikan-Kebudayaan-RI, 1989). Another law that hold 
a responsibility to govern the sustainability of education for 9-year compulsory education has been 
established as in Indonesian Law No.20 of 2003, concerning National Education System. Those laws 
are being translated locally through Perda No. 14 of 2018; in article 12, the City of Salatiga emphasizes 
that the compulsory primary education line consists of SD / MI and SMP / MTs. The function of 
compulsory education is to seek to expand and equalize opportunities to obtain quality education for 
The School Readiness Analysis in 2021/2022 Academic Year Amid Covid-19 Pandemic Based on 
The Regional Economic Resilience in Salatiga (Sri Sulandjari) 
92 
 
every community member, as the operationalization of Law no. 20 of 2003 Article 5 paragraph 1 in 
conjunction with Government Regulation no. 47 of 2008 concerning compulsory education Article 2. 
One goal of family involvement in education provision is to build synergy between the 
Education, Family, and Community Units (Listed in Permendikbud 30/2017 Article 2 d.) During the 
Covid-19 pandemic, the role of parental involvement is very much needed, especially in motivating 
children's enthusiasm for learning (Article 7.b.) because they have to undergo an online learning 
process. Moreover, in facilitating children's learning needs (Article 7.d), it is not enough to complete 
the hardware and network access needs and assistance in online learning. 
When threats arise that also result in income constraints on the one hand and weaken the 
community's ability to meet the needs of education costs, on the other hand, the potential for social 
vulnerability such as protests, quarrels, theft, and other malicious behavior can become evident. The 
causal relationship of education with economic resilience variables is like a circle that has no end. 
Since March 2020, the Covid-19 pandemic broke out in Indonesia and disrupted the learning 
process from an early age to college. Limited and Large-Scale Social Restriction Policies in several 
regions have caused the learning process to change from offline to online. In general, World Bank 
estimates Indonesia had a loss of about US$ 222.4 billion across 68 million students, and it analog with 
19.9 GDP through September 2020. This pandemic will suffer Indonesia's Resilience in global aspects. 
Therefore, the Government needs to encompass a comprehensive, holistic strategy for aiming optimal 
recovery to survive during the Covid-19 outbreak. Based on Indonesian Resilience factors (Thread, 
Challenge, Obstacles, and Distractions) and the interaction between aspects of economic Resilience 
with education, it shows that an understanding of the need for strategic policies in the field of education 
during the Covid-19 pandemic is essential and relevant to mitigate threats and overcome obstacles faced 
by society. Especially to achieve an increase in the quality of human resources (HR), they have a 
competitive advantage in this global era.  
In order to respond to this challenge, several pieces of research were conducted to recommend 
Government.  It focuses on five actions which are limiting the opportunity to have the mass meeting, 
accelerate immediate action of easily accessible public-health-support, finding the external fund, utilize 
current technology to fight the pandemic, and working together by promoting social community based 
on local people in order to make a path for immediate action of Covid-19 countermeasures. The next 
big thing is improving the economy's Resilience by getting external funding from the UN (Djalante et 
al., 2020).  
To hone education, Indonesia has already prepared for technology that enables long-distance 
learning platforms through the internet. However, the main issue that made distance teaching ineffective 
is teachers' unreadiness and the school system of administration that is not yet being designed. The 
majority of them still have offline-based paradigms, and most of them have low levels of e-literate 
(Churiyah et al., 2020).  Moreover, education has an indirect threat from EdTech companies that can 
take over the educational system since they already have a well-established IT infrastructure 
(Rumaksari, 2021). Another research regarding parents' opinions toward the online learning system in 
Salatiga stated that most of the parents experienced difficulties accompanying their children to study at 
home. The biggest obstacles are difficulties in directing children to learn and limited time (Sabiq, 2020).  
Meanwhile, when we note how the Government of Salatiga prepared the infrastructure for 
handling the pandemic, such as in education, it closed the school hours and made it online from March 
16th, 2020, until this article was created in April 2021. This is done starting from preschool to university. 
The result of this pandemic in Salatiga is an increase in poverty by 9.69 thousand or more or fewer 
people or by 4 percent. The poverty line has increased by 8.40 percent over the previous year, namely 
from Rp. 418,955, - in March 2019, it increased to Rp. 454,154, - as of March 2020 (Pemkot Salatiga, 
2021).  
In this paper, we are doing deep research on readiness school's activities in the school year 
2021/2022, and we conduct this research in Salatiga based on economic resilience factors. Economic is 
the leading factor because it is a factor that has an immediate effect on people's activities. Thus, the 
economic resilience factors is the determinant for maintaining education sector keep active during 
pandemic (Oprea et al., 2020). Based on this paradigm, there are not yet found in other research that 
analyzes the economic Resilience of Salatiga's response toward pandemic explicitly. 
This research will focus on the economic Resilience of the City of Salatiga from the demand 
side as measured by the community's ability to facilitate children's learning needs by considering the 
Scholaria: Jurnal Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, Vol. 11 No. 2, Mei 2021: 91-102 
93 
 
impact of the Covid-19 pandemic, in which parents and or students are the respondents. Therefore, this 
study aims to present a study paper based on the collection of data on the measurement of aspects and 
classifications of economic Resilience to facilitate children's learning needs, especially in the City of 
Salatiga during the Covid-19 pandemic. Secondly, providing input and recommendations to 
government officials and education units for materials for policy making against obstacles, threats, and 
disturbances to the economic Resilience of the City of Salatiga. 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The National Resilience 
Based on the Indonesia paradigm, National Resilience is a condition and a conception of 
national development in achieving the nation's goals and ideals. As a condition, National Resilience is 
a dynamic condition of the nation that contains the Resilience and Resilience and ability of the nation 
to develop national strength in facing all kinds and forms of threats, challenges, obstacles, and 
disturbances from within and outside, which threaten and endanger integrity. Identity and survival of 
the nation and state (Isabella, 2017). As a condition, National Resilience is a condition of national life 
that must be realized and fostered early, continuously, integrated, and synergistically. As a conception, 
National Resilience is a strategic conceptual foundation which is also a tool of analysis to solve various 
strategic problems of the nation through the approach of eight aspects of national life (asta gatra) which 
consists of three natural aspects (tri gatra), which are static and five aspects of life (panca gatra) that are 
dynamic. The roles and relationships between the eight dimensions are mutually interrelated and 
interdependent as a whole to form a society's behavior in national life (Mardhani et al., 2020; 
Rahatmawati & Muryantini, 2020).  
In its implementation, national Resilience is held by prioritizing a prosperity approach and a 
security approach that is harmonious, harmonious, and balanced. Prosperity can be described as the 
nation's ability to cultivate and develop its national values for the most excellent sake of prosperity that 
is just and equitable, spiritual and physical. Meanwhile, security must be understood as the nation's 
ability to protect its national values against external and internal threats, including protecting Pancasila 
as the state's basis. In the perspective of National Resilience, Indonesia's national defense cannot be 
separated from the influence and dynamics of conditions related to the eight aspects of national life 
above (Kemenhan RI, 2017).  
The concept of balance and interrelationship between one platform and another and the national 
defense system that is universal reflects a strong connection between the condition of National Defense 
and State Defense as a whole. Therefore, the fostering and conditioning of National Resilience in its 
various aspects will determine the quality of State Defense, both in peacetime and in wartime. The 
quality of State Defense will be directly proportional to National Resilience, which means that any 
changes in the condition of the National Resilience of the nation will automatically affect the quality of 
national defense in its implementation (Kemenhan RI, 2017). 
The Basic Concept of Economic Resilience 
According to Adam Smith, protecting society needs to be carried out by the defense force, 
which is the first obligation of the state (Alvey, 2003). Protection from good Government will play a 
role in harmonizing conflicts between private and social interests, preventing foreigners' exploitation, 
and stimulating an increase in productive investment. This security is transformed into a public good 
that must be prepared by the state impersonally and cannot be privatized or allowed to be managed 
alone by the community, and it is the right of every citizen to enjoy it.  Thus, defense is a product in the 
form of a public whose existence must be endeavored as a state's duty (Bondarenko et al., 2021). The 
community needs this type of goods, but no one is willing to produce it, even though private parties 
may produce it, but the amount is minimal. However, the use of this public good is for all citizens 
without exception, and not one person can be excluded or excluded from using it. 
The consequence of this defense as a public good is the complexity of analyzing it compared to 
private goods, where the mechanism of price formation is obvious in the market. Therefore, the review 
and analysis of defense as a public good is usually seen from its effect on other sectors of the economy. 
It is often called an externality. Thus defense behaves not only as a protective function of the state to 
realize national security and defense but also as a productive function because it also impacts the 
economy within a country (Taylor, 2018). 
The School Readiness Analysis in 2021/2022 Academic Year Amid Covid-19 Pandemic Based on 
The Regional Economic Resilience in Salatiga (Sri Sulandjari) 
94 
 
Maintaining the momentum of economic recovery by continuing to integrate synergy steps from 
various economic stakeholders seems to be a challenge that needs to be continuously supported, 
especially in ensuring that the various policies and strategies adopted by the Government in maintaining 
the momentum of economic growth and recovery can run optimally at a practical level.  Thus, efforts 
to continue to increase the effectiveness of Indonesian government spending through the National 
Economic Recovery Program can be a determinant factor in accelerating economic recovery. It is in 
line with the countercyclical principle, where when the economy is sluggish, government spending 
becomes a mainstay to boost the economy (Humas Sekretariat Kabinet Republik Indonesia, 2020). 
 
RESEARCH METHODS  
The disruption of Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 in the education sector is reflected in selecting 
variables and indicators to measure the dynamics of the Economic Resilience of the city of Salatiga. 
Therefore, variables and indicators are redefined as needed. The Covid-19 pandemic spread to Indonesia 
starting at the end of February and the first cases were found in Salatiga in March 2020. The Salatiga 
Government adopted a Central Government policy into the Salatiga City Health Protocol to tackle the 
spread of Covid-19. Five restrictions on social behavior that are thought to affect the learning process 
are: wash your hands frequently, wear a mask, stay at home (learn from home), keep your distance, and 
use personal protective equipment (PPE). Such health protocols greatly disrupt the teaching and 
learning process at schools or campuses and force the online teaching and learning process. Parents of 
students and students need additional expenses to provide adequate communication tools and 
operational costs for pulses. If this additional burden disrupts economic Resilience from the demand 
side, the Covid-19 pandemic variable may significantly impact the continuity of education. 
The data used are primary and was obtained from surveys, observations, and interviews. 
Quantitative data were analyzed using descriptive and inferential analysis techniques to estimate the 
variables of economic Resilience in the new academic year and during the Covid-19 pandemic. 
Measurement and analysis of policy-based variables and indicators required Expert Judgment. 
Respondent Profile 
This research is focused on residents of Salatiga. In general (99%) of the 249 respondents 
studied were Salatiga City residents, which were spread across four Districts in equal proportions. Two 
people (1%) of the population who live outside the City of Salatiga are respondents who work as civil 
servants in the City Government of Salatiga. As residents of Salatiga City, they have the right and 
obligation to guarantee their children's education (Pemda Salatiga, 2018) at least up to the first 
secondary level and comply with the health protocols established by the Salatiga City government.  
The total number of respondents reached 249 people, most of whom (77%) were workers or 
worked for other parties, followed by 15% were entrepreneurs and the remaining 8% were housewives. 
Among the workers' groups, there are company workers/employees (29.3%), ASN including ABRI & 
POLRI (27.3%) and private employees 11.6%. The sector most engaged in entrepreneurship is trade. 
ASN is the type of job with the highest degree of certainty, with fixed security and is not affected by 
the economic situation. In contrast to civil servants and laborers/employees, private employees and 
entrepreneurs experience uncertainty. 
 
Figure 1. Worker's employment 
 
Scholaria: Jurnal Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, Vol. 11 No. 2, Mei 2021: 91-102 
95 
 
The number of dependent children who are currently attending school and college is 330 out of 
233 respondents so that the average burden of dependents for children who are currently attending 
school per household is 1.42 children. While 233 children had just entered school/college from 199 
respondents, or the average burden of children attending school per household was 1.17 children. 
 
Table 1. Workspace Responent Table 
Workspace-respondent Percent (%) 
industry/employer 0.8 
social/employer 0.8 
professional 1.2 
service/employer 4.0 
housewife 8.0 
trade/employer 9.6 
private sector 11.6 
state sipil aparatus 27.3 
employee 29.3 
others 7.2 
 
 
Figure 2. The result's findings 
 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
The Covid-19 pandemic provided a wealth of experience for the world community including 
Salatiga, both in the way of daily life, how to work and do business, and how to learn. These three 
things become the variables studied and the results will be explained as follows at Figure 2. 
Changing lifestyle according to new health protocols 
During the Covid-19 pandemic, the Government proclaimed three types of health protocols: 
washing hands, using masks, and maintaining distance. From field observations, hand washing facilities 
have been provided evenly in work environments (offices and business premises), schools and 
campuses, public facilities, and residential areas provided independently, government assistance, and 
personal assistance. The dynamic behavior of washing hands has been quite ingrained, accepted and 
implemented by the general public, including among the respondents. In addition to hand washing 
stations, several offices and business premises are also provided with hand sanitizers containing 
antiseptic as an alternative to washing hands. Hand sanitizers are also often provided independently and 
carried by the community, especially workers and students, including students wherever they go outside 
the home. 
Meanwhile, masks' use has become a habit for the general public, including respondents. What 
more, there are justice operations in open spaces. Warnings on the use of masks in offices and business 
places are written in banners and conveyed verbally in local associations in a way that reminds each 
other so that feelings of embarrassment if violating regulations develop. 
Seating facilities and production premises, and service areas in offices and premises are 
arranged to allow workers and the "consumer" community to maintain a distance. More than that, 
service facilities for guests, partners, customers, and tenants are generally equipped with a transparent 
screen made of plastic, acrylic, or glass to prevent the possibility of spreading Covid-19 through droplets 
that can be thrown while talking or coughing. From in-depth interviews with several representative 
The School Readiness Analysis in 2021/2022 Academic Year Amid Covid-19 Pandemic Based on 
The Regional Economic Resilience in Salatiga (Sri Sulandjari) 
96 
 
respondents, such distancing markers and protective devices mean a possible barrier to exposure to 
Covid-19 and have torn the habit of communicating and expressing affection for friends, friends, 
colleagues, and relatives through touch or kiss. At first, it was awkward, but it gradually developed a 
habit of self-control from wanting to touch friends, friends, colleagues, and relatives. Then replace it 
with the greeting "namaste" to maintain distance. 
Changing work style 
There were advised to work at home at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in Indonesia, 
marked by Large-Scale Social Restrictions (LSSR). This is implemented to work from home (WFH) by 
utilizing information and communication technology, either 100% or 50%. This way of working is 
carried out by Government and private offices, schools and campuses, and large and small companies. 
This study indicated the compliance of the majority of respondents (77%), even though they noted 
difficulties and sacrifices. 
 
 
Figure 2. WFH for LSSR 
 
Most of the respondents (62%) had difficulty staying at home because they worked (Figure 3.), 
both working for government agencies and private companies and their own companies as 
entrepreneurs. Respondents who experienced a decrease in income because they only worked half a day 
(2%) and were sent home were forced to leave the house to look for side jobs (2%) and earn additional 
income. The Covid-19 pandemic has encouraged social workers and people who care about their social 
responsibilities not to stay at home. They (11%) carry out their social activities, both old responsibilities 
they have carried out and new tasks related to overcoming the spread of Covid-19 and its effects. The 
respondent goes out of the house in a short time to shop for basic needs or for urgent needs, such as 
going to the doctor or to a health facility when a family member is sick. 
 
 
Figure 3. Reason for having difficulties of stay at home protocol 
 
The number of respondents who chose to be obedient to stay at home was only 32 people (13%). 
In general (88%) are based on awareness of safety to avoid exposure to Covid-19 and a desire to comply 
with government recommendations (Figure 4.). Two respondents who were laid off from their 
workplaces (9%) still chose to stay at home to comfort themselves and plan what to do next. Meanwhile, 
one person (3%) who was sent home chose to spend time at home to accompany his child to study 
online. 
Scholaria: Jurnal Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, Vol. 11 No. 2, Mei 2021: 91-102 
97 
 
 
Figure 4. Obediently stay at home reasons 
 
Changing study style for students 
The Covid-19 pandemic provides an online teaching-learning process (TL), from early 
childhood to university. Health protocols are strengthened by government regulations considering that 
the actual and potential distribution is so fast that it is categorized as an emergency. Some of them use 
portfolios for learning phases (Anugraheni et al., 2017). In the field of education, from March to July 
2020, the implementation of TL at the PAUD, kindergarten, elementary, junior high, high school and 
tertiary education levels is conducted online. The implementation of TL online continues in the first 
semester of the 2020/2021 school year. Figure 5. below shows that 95% of the 226 respondents stated 
that their children's TL was organized online. Twenty-three people did not provide data, or the data 
provided was invalid. In the group of respondents who stated that their children's TL was carried out 
face-to-face or offline, most of them were those whose children were attending high school, especially 
in tertiary institutions. Some of their children are outside the city, so the respondents do not know how 
their children follow TL. 
 
 
Figure 5. TL activities 
 
The popular TL media that are widely used by the respondent's children in online learning are 
WhatsApp and the internet (Figure 6.). In general, the online media used by the respondent's children 
is determined by the teacher or lecturer, according to what the teacher/lecturer uses. There are only a 
few direct communication media in TL, namely Zoom meeting (15%) and Google meet (6%), which 
students generally use. 
 
 
Figure 6. Options for online class 
88%
3%
9%
In order to follow
Government regulation, WFH
for COVID-19
Nurture and assist children
online
Layoff, doesn't have plan yet
95%
5%
Online
Offline
0
.5
0
.4
9
0
.1
5
0
.0
6
0
.0
3
0
.0
2
0
.0
1
0
.0
1
The School Readiness Analysis in 2021/2022 Academic Year Amid Covid-19 Pandemic Based on 
The Regional Economic Resilience in Salatiga (Sri Sulandjari) 
98 
 
 
 
 
 
F
ig
u
re
 7
. 
Im
p
a
ct
 o
f 
P
a
n
d
em
ic
 c
la
ss
if
ic
a
ti
o
n
 b
y
 I
n
d
u
st
ry
 
Scholaria: Jurnal Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, Vol. 11 No. 2, Mei 2021: 91-102 
99 
 
Economic Resilience Analysis: Impact of the pandemic 
The Covid-19 pandemic has encouraged changes in people's lifestyles and invited government 
intervention through the emergence of laws and regulations along with law enforcement, funds, 
personnel, and facilities. Society, individually and collectively, is doing the same thing. The Covid-19 
pandemic resulted in many Salatiga residents experiencing a decrease in income both in absolute and 
relative terms. The absolute decrease in income occurs due to loss of work or a reduction in working 
hours, while the relative decrease in income occurs due to increased prices and increased types of needs, 
especially personal protective equipment and other food and vitamins to increase body immunity. These 
types of additional needs fall into the category of basic needs during the Covid-19 pandemic. Based on 
(Martin et al., 2016), people who experience a decrease in total income will automatically experience a 
decrease in relative income. When people's purchasing power decreases due to decreased income, the 
types of needs that can be postponed do not become a priority for allocating income or funds. However, 
economic cycle of pandemic affected area would continue to get stable because economic activity 
would be turn into equilibrium state (Gonchar, 1994)(Simmie & Martin, 2010).  
School Readiness of Salatiga 
The Government regulates the offline teaching method using regulation 04/KB/2020 
(Kebudayaan et al., 2020); this regulation regulates how the school can conduct offline learning. Based 
on the articles, we can conclude that there are five preparations that, as legal and formal administration, 
need to be done before the Government allows the school to be opened for offline teaching. The 
procedures are first managed to carry out offline learning after granting permission process, then filled 
form attendance periodically, passed the Covid-19 screening test, and confirmed all protocols. The 
licensing stage starts from the Regional Government or Regional Office / Regional Office of the 
Ministry of Religion. Then, an examination is carried out with a checklist that will be supported by the 
school committee's approval or parent/guardian representative. 
 
 
Figure 8. Flow formal-legal administration to open offline class. 
 
Based on other features, some infrastructures need to be prepared, such as: 
 The room needs to be prepared to maintain a minimum distance 1,5 meters. 
 A Covid-19 task force in charge of the field understands standard health protocols (wearing 
masker, washing hand before-after school, wash practice tools before the start). 
 Ensuring student is traceable, during school period in order to know where the spread's 
activities. 
It is understandable that adhere these protocols require particular budgets; therefore, not every 
institution can comply with this standard. For instance, to create a learning environment with distance, 
room arrangement needs to be done, and when many students are attending, the available rooms are not 
enough to accommodate it. Therefore, the current situation makes institutions hold to prefer online than 
offline teaching. The city major of Salatiga, Yulianto, stated that offline learning will be held gradually 
from school year 2021, even though the regulation allows it already from 2020. He said that it is related 
The School Readiness Analysis in 2021/2022 Academic Year Amid Covid-19 Pandemic Based on 
The Regional Economic Resilience in Salatiga (Sri Sulandjari) 
100 
 
to Salatiga's Government's preparation in making the infrastructure (monitoring and adjustment of the 
Covid-19 protocols), which is planned to be ready by the end of 2020 (www.kompas.com, 2021). 
Education and Economic Resilience in Salatiga 
 Based on the economic Resilience of Salatiga, we found that the impact of the pandemic is 
more significant for employees of social business, public/civil service, housewives, farmers, and 
employees in private sectors. Since the fewer income groups are becoming the majority, then sudden 
changes in learning methods are not recommended. Because parents need to prepare their finance based 
on priority needs. From figure 7, we also find that more than 80% of respondents earn less income 
because of the pandemic, and a majority of them (figure 2) prefer WFH. Thus, Government needs to 
create progressive actions to create infrastructures to continue increasing the economic resilience 
factors. Because increasing economic infrastructure helps increase the availability of students to follow 
educational needs. Figure 9 is the relation of economic resilience analysis for the readiness of education. 
This research purpose three factors that enable the government to increase the Economic resilience 
while dealing with education progress. First is to increase economic resilience using free educational 
support infrastructure by government. Second is about increase the effectivity of learning by gradual 
improving offline learning with respect toward Covid’s protocol. Third is about confirm the extra need 
to create public protocol and infrastructure to prevent Covid’s pandemic. 
 
 
Figure 9. Economic Resilience analysis for Education Readiness 
 
CONCLUSION 
Based on finding that we found in our research, we conclude that more than 80% of Salatiga 
have less income because of a pandemic. However, the people's purchasing power is not weak compared 
to the pandemic, rather than shift their need as a big picture to survive. Education is one critical aspect 
of their needs. Because of the pandemic, students and parents need to prepare extra budgets for 
complying with specific protocols for attending the education. 
Regulation 04/KB/2020 about offline activity arrangement. An institution is permitted to 
organize offline learning with term and conditions apply. Although it is allowed, the Government of 
Salatiga needs to make a particular arrangement, and it has resulted that offline activities can be carried 
out in the 2021 school year. Based on the research, there are several criteria to determine the success of 
offline learning. Firstly, increasing economic resilience effect at least poverty rate decrease more than 
50%, a free hotspot for online learning. Secondly, the institution needs to create infrastructure to support 
Covid-19 protocols of offline learning. If economic Resilience better, then automatically compliance 
with offline protocols will pay off. We found that Salatiga has tended to get better resilience factors 
because most people work as farmers and plantations; therefore, they have enough economic sources 
to rely on. Therefore, the Government of Salatiga is already on the correct path to make the education 
system ready for New Normal. 
 
Scholaria: Jurnal Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, Vol. 11 No. 2, Mei 2021: 91-102 
101 
 
REFERENCE 
Alvey, J. E. (2003). Adam Smith’s view of history: Consistent or paradoxical? In History of the Human 
Sciences (Vol. 16, Issue 2, pp. 1–25). https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0952695103016002001 
Anugraheni, I., Guru, P., Dasar, S., Kristen, U., & Wacana, S. (2017). Penggunaan Portofolio Dalam 
Perkuliahan Penilaian Pembelajaran. In Jurnal Pendidikan Dasar Perkhasa: Jurnal Penelitian 
Pendidikan Dasar (Vol. 3, Issue 1). https://doi.org/10.31932/JPDP. V3I1.40 
Bondarenko, S., Tkach, I., Drobotov, S., Mysyk, A., & Plutytska, K. (2021). National resilience as a 
determinant of national security of Ukraine. Journal of Optimization in Industrial Engineering, 
14(1), 111–117. https://doi.org/10.22094/JOIE.2020.677837 
Churiyah, M., Sholikhan, Filianti, & Ayu Sakdiyyah, D. (2020). International Journal of Multicultural 
and Multireligious Understanding Indonesia Education Readiness Conducting Distance 
Learning in Covid-19 Pandemic Situation. International Journal of Multicultural and 
Multireligious Understanding (IJMMU), 7(6), 491–507. 
Djalante, R., Lassa, J., Setiamarga, D., Sudjatma, A., Indrawan, M., Haryanto, B., Mahfud, C., Sinapoy, 
M. S., Djalante, S., Rafliana, I., Gunawan, L. A., Surtiari, G. A. K., & Warsilah, H. (2020). 
Review and analysis of current responses to COVID-19 in Indonesia: Period of January to 
March 2020. Progress in Disaster Science, 6, 100091. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pdisas.2020.100091 
Drewery, W. (2011). Human Development. Waikato Journal of Education, 16(3), 9–18. 
https://doi.org/10.15663/wje.v16i3.31 
Gonchar, N. (1994). Theory of economic equilibrium. Journal of Nonlinear Mathematical Physics, 
1(4), 380–400. https://doi.org/10.2991/jnmp.1994.1.4.4 
Humas Sekretariat Kabinet Republik Indonesia. (2020). Menjaga Momentum Pemulihan Ekonomi. 
Sekretariat Kabinet Republik Indonesia. https://setkab.go.id/menjaga-momentum-pemulihan-
ekonomi/ 
Isabella, M. (2017). Strengthening The National Resilience of Indonesia Through Socialization of 
National Insight. Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research (ASSEHR), 
163(Icodag), 224–228. https://doi.org/10.2991/icodag-17.2017.42 
Kemenhan RI. (2017). Nasionalisme Dan Bela Negara Dalam Perspektif Ketahanan Nasional – Bela 
Negara. Web-Official Kemenhan-RI. https://www.kemhan.go.id/ belanegara/opini/asd 
Kementrian-Pendidikan-Kebudayaan-RI. (1989). Penjelasan Uu Republik Indonesia Nomor 2 Tahun 
1989. Web. Https://Jdih.Kemenkeu.Go.Id/Fulltext/1989/ 2tahun~1989UU Penj.htm 
Mardhani, D., Runturambi, A. J. S., & Hanita, M. (2020). Security and Defense in National Resilience 
Studies To Realize a National Security System. Jurnal Pertahanan & Bela Negara, 10(3), 267. 
https://doi.org/10.33172/jpbh.v10i3.1112 
Martin, R., Sunley, P., Gardiner, B., & Tyler, P. (2016). How Regions React to Recessions: Resilience 
and the Role of Economic Structure. Regional Studies, 50(4), 561–585. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2015.1136410 
Noor, A. Y. M., & Hussain, E. M. H. (2014). Religion and belief towards human development. 
International Conference of Historians of Asia, January. 
Oprea, F., Onofrei, M., Lupu, D., Vintila, G., & Paraschiv, G. (2020). The determinants of economic 
resilience. The case of Eastern European regions. Sustainability (Switzerland), 12(10), 1–11. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su12104228 
Paliova, I., McNown, R., & Nülle, G. (2019). Multiple Dimensions of Human Development Index and 
Public Social Spending for Sustainable Development. IMF Working Papers, 19(204). 
https://doi.org/10.5089/9781513511924.001 
The School Readiness Analysis in 2021/2022 Academic Year Amid Covid-19 Pandemic Based on 
The Regional Economic Resilience in Salatiga (Sri Sulandjari) 
102 
 
Pemda Salatiga. (2018). PERDA Kota Salatiga No. 18 Tahun 2018 tentang Penyelenggaraan 
Administrasi Kependudukan [JDIH BPK RI]. Https://Peraturan.Bpk.Go.Id/. 
https://peraturan.bpk.go.id/Home/Details/109829/perda-kota-salatiga-no-18-tahun-2018 
Pemkot Salatiga. (2021). Badan Pusat Statistik. Https://Salatigakota.Bps.Go.Id/. 
https://salatigakota.bps.go.id/pressrelease/2020/12/29/153/kemiskinan-kota-salatiga-maret-
2020.html 
Rahatmawati, I., & Muryantini, S. (2020). United States of America – China Trade War: Challenge and 
Opportunity for Indonesian National Resilience. Advances in Social Science, Education and 
Humanities Research, 477(Iccd), 364–367. https://doi.org/10.2991/assehr.k.201017.081 
Rumaksari, A. N. (2021). Pembelajaran Daring: Ancaman Perusahaan EdTech Pada Sekolah Ditengah 
Pandemi Covid-19. Scholaria: Jurnal Pendidikan Dan Kebudayaan, 11(1), 30–36. 
https://doi.org/10.24246/j.js.2021.v11.i1.p30-36 
Sabiq, A. F. (2020). Persepsi Orang Tua Siswa tentang Kegiatan Belajar di Rumah sebagai Dampak 
Penyebaran Covid 19. Ilmu Pendidikan Pkn Dan Sosial Budaya, 4(1), 1–7. 
Simmie, J., & Martin, R. (2010). The economic resilience of regions: Towards an evolutionary 
approach. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 3(1), 27–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cjres/rsp029 
Taylor, T. (2018). Principle of Economics 2e. In OpenStax (pp. 301–318). OpenStack. 
www.kompas.com. (2021, April 6). Salatiga dan Pandeglang Telah Jalankan Sekolah Tatap Muka 
Halaman all - Kompas.com. Www.Kompas.Com. https://www.kompas. 
com/edu/read/2021/04/06/141721371/salatiga-dan-pandeglang-telah-jalankan-sekolah-tatap-
muka?page=all 
 
