Official Business: International Trade Law and the Resurgence (or Resilience) of the State as an Economic Actor

 821 OFFICIAL BUSINESS: INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW AND THE RESURGENCE (OR RESILIENCE) OF THE STATE AS AN ECONOMIC ACTOR ROB HOWSE ABSTRACT  The end of the 20th century was a time of privatization; so far, the new millennium has heralded a resurgence of state capitalism. China is doubtless Exhibit A. The notion that state enterprises engage in unfair competition is now a common refrain. It is conventional wisdom that the World Trade Organization has not held up on this front, and that the WTO needs new rules to reign in state enterprises. This Article challenges that point of view.  Governments should not be able to circumvent existing WTO rules through state enterprises but putting the state sector under new special constraints is unjustified.  State enterprise can be a legitimate tool of public policy.  Focusing complaints about anti-competitive behavior on the state sector is unwarranted: private firms may also engage in unfair competition and abuse market power.  Carefully examining the case   Lloyd C. Nelson Professor of International Law, New York University School of Law.  The idea for this paper originated in a keynote address to the Colloquium on International Investment Law & State Capitalism, University of Athens, October 15, 2020.  I presented earlier versions at workshops at Harvard Law School and the University of California (Irvine) Law School.  I am grateful to participants at these events for helpful comments, and especially Mark Wu, Greg Shaffer, Rachel Brewster, and Dan Tarullo.  I am especially grateful for exchanges at the OECD with Marion Jansen, Susan Stone, Taku Nemoto, Yuki Matsumoto, and Christian Steidel (Emerging Policy Issues Directorate) and especially an extended (Zoom) meeting in May where we discussed their recent joint work on state enterprises and below-market finance, infra note 6, and its implications for WTO reform.  Henry Gao also provided very useful comments. Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,822 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 law in the WTO, this Article argues that there is a strong basis in existing jurisprudence for holding governments accountable for the conduct of state firms, despite one often-cited anomalous tribunal decision.  The Article advocates greater transparency & dialogue in the WTO about how ownership structure affects competition and trade—but applied equally to both public & private entities.  https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 823 TABLE OF CONTENTS I. Introduction............................................................................... 824 II. State Enterprise and the GATT Case Law ........................... 833 III. GATT Article XVII: State Trading Enterprises and Judicial Economy ............................................................................. 840 IV. Attribution, State Responsibility, and the Meaning of “Public Body” in the WTO Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM) Agreement ............... 848 a. Public Body Does Not Mean the Same as State-Owned Enterprise .................................................................... 851 b. Exercise of Governmental Authority ............................... 851 c. State Ownership and Control Relevant but Not Dispositive Evidence of a Public Body ........................................... 855 d. The China Exception ....................................................... 857 V. The Solution: A Presumption Based Upon State Ownership and/or Control .................................................................. 858 VI. Is There a Need for New Primary Obligations to Discipline State Enterprises? .............................................................. 860 a. ”Competitive Neutrality” ................................................ 860 i. So, What Is Inadequate or Not Captured by the Notion of “Competitive Neutrality” in Existing WTO Disciplines? ...................................................... 861 b. China and Beyond ............................................................ 864 c. Rethinking Competitive Neutrality ................................. 867 i. National Treatment of Enterprises in Like Circumstances .................................................. 867 ii. State Enterprises and the Limits of Existing WTO Subsidies Disciplines ........................................ 870 iii. “Competitive Neutrality” as an Anti-Trust Concept .......................................................................... 874 d. The Fundamentally Misguided Approach to State Enterprises in the Comprehensive Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership ...................................................... 878 VII. Conclusion ............................................................................. 881 Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,824 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 I. INTRODUCTION The end of the 20th century was a time of privatization; so far, the new millennium has heralded a resurgence of state capitalism. 1  According to a recent IMF report, “[t]he share of state-owned enterprises among the world’s 2000 largest firms doubled to 20 percent over the last two decades, driven by state-owned enterprises in emerging markets—their assets are worth $45 trillion, equivalent to half of global GDP.”2 China is doubtless Exhibit A.  Its accession to the WTO was celebrated by economic liberals as a decisive step away from such practices.  In a March 2008 speech, then-President Bill Clinton claimed: “By joining the WTO, China is not simply agreeing to import more of our products; it is agreeing to import one of democracy’s most cherished values: economic freedom.”3 Contrary to many predictions, China did not abandon the model of a state-driven economy. Instead, it combined that model with fierce competitiveness in global markets, often supported by large subsidies. 4  Beyond China, the rise of sovereign wealth funds (“SWFs”) has shown a new side to state capitalism; SWFs have been transforming themselves from passive or portfolio investors to active capitalists, involved in private equity and even venture capital.5 The notion that state enterprises engage in unfair competition is now a common refrain.6 A new OECD study refers with concern to “the outsized role that SOES continue to play in the global   1 JOSHUA KURLANTZICK, The State is Back in Business, in HOW THE RETURN OF STATISM IS TRANSFORMING THE WORLD 1-26 (2016).   2 Vitor Gaspar et al., State Owned Enterprises in the Time of COVID-19, IMF BLOG (May 7, 2020), https://blogs.imf.org/2020/05/07/state-owned-enterprises-in-the-time-of-covid-19/ [https://perma.cc/H2X5-R3EN]; see also INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND, State-Owned Enterprises: The Other Government, in FISCAL MONITOR: POLICIES TO  SUPPORT PEOPLE DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 47 (2020).   3  PAUL BLUSTEIN, SCHISM: CHINA, AMERICA AND THE FRACTURING OF THE GLOBAL TRADING SYSTEM 65 (2019)  4    See id. at 111-140.   5 See Bernardo Bortolotti & Alessandro Scortecci, Sovereign Wealth Funds’ New Approach to Private Markets, IFSWF (2018), https://archive.ifswfreview.org/2018/our-partners/sovereign-wealth-funds-new-approach-private-markets [https://perma.cc/46M4-YV5D].  6 OECD, STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES AS GLOBAL COMPETITORS: A CHALLENGE OR OPPORTUNITY? 27-28 (2016). https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 825 economy.” 7  It is conventional wisdom that the World Trade Organization has not held up on this front, and that the WTO needs new rules to reign in state enterprises. 8  In the words of one commentator: “The failure of World Trade Organization (WTO) treaties and agreements to make a proper assessment of the problem of state-owned companies has caused major imbalances and a huge image problem for free trade and its advocates, as they are seen as defending the indefensible.”9 The latest communiqué of G7 Trade Ministers calls, in the context of WTO reform, “for the start of negotiations to develop stronger international rules on market-distorting industrial subsidies and trade-distorting actions by state enterprises.”10 This Article questions the case for international trade law targeting state enterprises in the name of fair or free (“undistorted”) trade.  State enterprise is a tool of public policy, to which some governments are partial while others are not.  Focusing complaints about anti-competitive behavior on the state sector is unwarranted: private firms may also engage in unfair competition and abuse market power.  The WTO should not prejudge governments’ choices of policy instrument, provided there is compliance with WTO disciplines on non-discrimination as well as those on subsidies. I argue that state enterprises should be subject to the same trade law disciplines as the state is.  Governments should not be able to circumvent trade rules by acting through state enterprises, and it is thus important that under WTO jurisprudence, the actions of state enterprises be attributable to states themselves, engaging their responsibility in WTO law.  At the same time, governments should not face any special burden or obstacle when choosing state ownership as a policy tool.   7 OECD, MEASURING DISTORTIONS IN INTERNATIONAL MARKETS: BELOW-MARKET FINANCE 10 (2021).   8 See Robert Howse, Making the WTO (Not So) Great Again: The Case Against Responding to the Trump Trade Agenda Through Reform of WTO Rules on Subsidies and State Enterprises, 23 J. INT’L ECON. L.  371, 372 (2020).  9 Alejandro Chafuen, Trade by State-Owned Companies: Global But Is It Fair? FORBES (Oct. 31, 2019, 4:33 PM), https://www.forbes.com/sites/alejandrochafuen/2019/10/31/trade-by-state-owned-companies-global-but-is-it-fair/?sh=36ecc65d20f5 [https://perma.cc/4PJ7-UYGH].  10 Department for International Trade & The Rt Hon Elizabeth Truss MP, G7 Trade Ministers' Communiqué, GOV.UK (May 28, 2021), https://www.gov.uk/government/news/g7-trade-ministers-communique [https://perma.cc/PL7W-8XFZ]. Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,826 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 A major catalyst for including state enterprises11 in the agenda for WTO reform has been the strongly negative reaction, particularly in Washington, to a WTO Appellate Body (“AB”) decision that interpreted narrowly the expression “public body” in the WTO Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (“SCM”) Agreement.12  The SCM Agreement definition of subsidy, for purposes both of multilateral disciplines and permissible unilateral responses (countervailing duties), includes financial contributions not only by governments but also by public bodies.  The AB held that state ownership and formal control were not per se sufficient to deem an entity a public body; rather there had to be additional evidence that governmental action (such as explicit delegation of governmental authority) was behind the financial payments by the entity.13 Critics of state enterprises deploy the Appellate Body decision on “public body” as a wakeup call.  WTO rules, they claim, were not up to the task of preventing circumvention of the rulebook through state capitalism as exemplified by China.14  Petros Mavroidis and Andre Sapir assert that the GATT, 15  the WTO’s main treaty governing trade in goods, which originated in the post-World War II period, was unsuited to addressing state capitalism. Among the GATT’s original member states (Contracting Parties), “[s]tate involvement in the workings of the economy was confined to a few   11 In this Article, I use the term “state enterprises” to designate a range of business entities over which the state has influence beyond the use of general policy tools like regulation.  What level or kind of influence triggers the concerns discussed here is itself a matter of debate and, indeed, some confusion, with the highest level of concern often being expressed over enterprises that are owned in whole or in part by the state and through which it exercises control through appointment of the board and/or managers.  Yet these are hardly the only ways in which the state can influence the operational or business decisions of enterprises.  Thus, in using the term “state enterprises” I leave open the question of what level of state involvement or influence, and what kind, should trigger WTO disciplines, new or proposed.  12 Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures art. 1, Apr. 15, 1994 Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, Annex 1A, 1869 U.N.T.S. 14 [hereinafter SCM Agreement].  13  Appellate Body Report, United States—Definitive Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Duties on Certain Products from China, ¶ 359, WTO Doc. WT/DS379/AB/R (adopted Mar. 11, 2011).  The dispute concerned, in relevant part, financing of Chinese companies by state-owned Chinese banks.  14 OECD, supra note 7, at 61-62.  15  General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, Apr. 15, 1994, Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, Annex 1A, 1867 U.N.T.S. 187 (1994) [hereinafter GATT]. https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 827 cases with special circumstances.”16 The GATT provision explicitly directed to the question of state enterprises, Article XVII, has gone largely unused, and in the one significant dispute applying Article XVII, it was largely reduced by the AB to a reaffirmation of non-discrimination norms elsewhere in the GATT architecture. In a recent paper on WTO reform the European Commission asserts: [T]he importance of SOEs is not yet matched with sufficient disciplines to capture any market-distorting behavior. New international SOE rules should focus on the behavior of SOEs in their commercial activities, in line with the disciplines already agreed in several free trade and investment agreements. Apart from industrial subsidies and SOE disciplines, there is a need to reflect on what other elements could be part of new WTO rules aiming at ensuring the principle of “competitive neutrality” and promoting a level playing field.17 This article suggests that state capitalism’s skeptics tend to combine or conflate two different questions, with very distinct systemic and normative implications for the WTO system.  The first question, clearly raised by the Appellate Body’s decisions on “public body,” is whether the existing WTO legal framework is adequate to prevent the use of state enterprises to circumvent or undermine existing disciplines, such as core norms against discrimination and anti-competitive subsidization. Understood in terms of general international law, this is largely a matter of state responsibility or attribution (“secondary obligations”)—under what circumstances a WTO Member is responsible where a state enterprise acts contrary to an existing operative provision (or “primary obligation”) such as that of non-discrimination.18 A quite different issue is whether state enterprises should be disfavored by new WTO rules (new primary obligations).  These would discipline state enterprises, or government conduct in   16  PETROS MAVROIDIS & ANDRE SAPIR, CHINA AND THE WTO: WHY MULTILATERALISM STILL MATTERS 68-69 (2021).  17 Annex to the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, at 9-10, COM (2021) 66 final (Feb. 18, 2021).  18 Marko Milanovic, Special Rules of Attribution of Conduct in International Law, 96 INT’L L. STUD. 295, 299-301 (2020).  Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,828 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 relation to them, in ways not covered by existing WTO rules.19 State capitalism skeptics like Mavroidis and Sapir would like to constrain state enterprises through new primary obligations.  In other words, state enterprises would be more constrained than under established WTO norms such as non-discrimination where fully applied to state enterprise conduct. By contrast, the basic understanding of the original GATT was that the multilateral trading system is neutral as between state enterprises and private enterprises; provided Members of the WTO do not use state enterprises to circumvent their general obligations under the WTO treaties, there is no special impediment or burden on the choice for state ownership.  The GATT and indeed the WTO do not require that private ownership be dominant in all economic sectors, or at all. In this Article, I disaggregate the question of attribution or state responsibility. I distinguish between the challenge of preventing circumvention of existing WTO obligations through the (often non-transparent) use of state enterprises and the issue of new primary obligations to “tame” state capitalism.  In Parts II-V  of the Paper I focus on attribution, and in Part VI the proposal for new rules targeted explicitly at state enterprises (additional primary obligations). In Part II, I establish (contrary to, e.g., Mavroidis and Sapir) state enterprises were a live issue in the GATT from its early years on.  In repeated GATT panel decisions, GATT Contracting Parties were consistently held responsible for the conduct of state enterprises that was contrary to GATT norms.  Indeed, GATT panels were prepared to find state responsibility even where non-state market actors engaged in GATT-inconsistent behavior, as long as government was involved in some way that was apt to influence the behavior in question (even if the involvement were non-binding “guidance,” or incentives, rather than mandatory actions).  GATT panels (rightly) gave considerable importance to developing legal interpretations and jurisdictional constructs that addressed the dangers of governments circumventing GATT disciplines through acting other than through formal mandatory laws and regulations.  As consolidated and summarized by an early WTO panel, Canada-Periodicals, the state is responsible under GATT/ WTO law wherever   19 Currently, with very few exceptions, the WTO legal framework does not extend to standards of treatment for investors or investments, or anti-trust/competition policy. https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 829 an entity is capable of being subject to governmental instructions or dependent on government action, regardless of its formal independence from government or its organizational structure, even where the entity is performing a “commercial” mandate or function. 20  Another relatively early WTO panel noted (with approval) that “panels have taken a broad view of when a governmental action is a law, regulation or requirement….”21 The ultimate question of whether there is “sufficient government involvement”22 has been generally affirmative in the case of state-owned and/or -controlled enterprises. Based on the analysis in Part II, in Part III I confront the claim that GATT Article XVII on State Trading Enterprises has turned out to be ineffective or non-functional in disciplining state enterprises.  Because of the general approach of GATT panels to state responsibility and attribution, as discussed in Part II, the additional obligations in Article XVII of the GATT were not needed additions to GATT rules.  Thus, contrary to what is sometimes suggested, the non-application of Article XVII in disputes involving state enterprises was not due to the panels’ laxity in enforcing GATT disciplines but to the contrary: liability was found based on general principles of attribution and state responsibility, and thus judicial economy dictated not deciding the further claims under Article XVII. In the Canada Wheat Board dispute, a case usually invoked where the Appellate Body rejects a claim under Article XVII, as I explain, the claimant (the United States) was asserting a view of Article XVII that implied a per se prohibition on state enterprises that were capable of affecting market prices through anti-competitive behavior.  But the language relied on by the United States, “commercial considerations,” refers not to a prohibition on anti-competitive behavior such as monopolistic pricing, but to the basic concept of equality of competitive opportunities that has come to underpin non-discrimination jurisprudence in the GATT/WTO.  This explains why the requirement of “commercial considerations” is not severable from the notion of non-discrimination, as the AB rightly held.   20 Panel Report, Canada – Certain Measures Concerning Periodicals, ¶¶ 5.35-5.37, WTO Doc. WT/DS31/R (adopted Mar. 14, 1997) [hereinafter Canada-Periodicals].  21  Panel Report, Japan – Measures Affecting Consumer Photographic Film and Paper, ¶ 10.51, WTO Doc. WT/DS44/R (adopted Apr. 22, 1998) [hereinafter Japan-Film].       22 Id. ¶ 10.56.  Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,830 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 In Part IV, I consider the criticism of the Appellate Body’s decisions on the meaning of “public body” in the SCM Agreement.  I agree with the critics’ view as it applies to the first Appellate Body report addressing this issue.  In that report, the AB appeared to require that to constitute a public body an entity had to exercise regulatory authority or delegated governmental functions.  I show that this is neither consistent with the jurisprudence discussed above nor the text and structure of the SCM Agreement. Finally, this ruling of the AB seems to be based in no small part on a misapplication of general rules of state responsibility in public international law—all the while a specialized approach to state responsibility developed in the GATT case law, which was largely ignored by the AB. In Part V, I respond positively to the suggestions of some critics of state enterprise that the AB’s shift in direction in these subsequent cases should be consolidated through a presumption that state ownership and/or control is a sufficient basis for attribution, whether under the “public body” rubric of the SCM Agreement or more generally as in the earlier cases, including those from the GATT era.  I seek to defend this presumption on a number of grounds.  First, as Ming Du notes in the case of China, “even where state-enterprises are structured as independent from government and government officials are actually mandated by the state not to interfere with day-to day business operations, “the management of SOEs continues to be influenced by policy considerations.” 23 Second, as Sappington and Stiglitz suggest, public ownership makes government intervention less costly in terms of transaction costs than regulation and taxation. 24  This can create a temptation to achieve policy or political objectives by influencing the decisions of publicly owned enterprises.  Third, and not unrelated, unlike regulation and taxation, intervention in state enterprises can be quite informal and non-transparent. Therefore devising legal norms to prohibit informal influence or require transparency is a complex undertaking, and enforcing them in dispute settlement is even more daunting. Finally, the incentive structure for managers in state enterprises may lead to types of favoritism that would undermine WTO rules.  Managers in state enterprises often have careers more like those of   23 Ming Du, China’s State Capitalism and World Trade Law, 63 INT’L & COMPAR. L.Q. 409, 418 (2014).  24  See David Sappington & Joseph Stiglitz, Privatization, Information and Incentives 2 (Nat’l Bureau of Econ. Rsch., Working Paper No. 2196, 1987).  https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 831 national civil servants (or are civil servants). Their future employment prospects depend less on performance that can be observed and evaluated in the transnational market for managers than on long-term relationships with domestic politicians and high-level officials.25 They may well act in such a way as to preserve or enhance relationships with domestic public officials, including managers of other state enterprises who are clients and suppliers, and who may have influence on their future career prospects.  This could include favoritism inconsistent with GATT principles of non-discrimination.26 In Part VI, I consider the case for new primary WTO obligations  targeted specifically at state enterprises.  I attempt to unpack the elements of what the advocates of such new rules label “competitive neutrality.”  I argue that there should be a strong presumption against new, state enterprise-specific, primary obligations. First, the problem of circumvention or cheating on existing WTO obligations through state enterprises is soluble with a modest evolution of the existing framework for attribution and state responsibility, as argued in Parts II–V.  Second, singling out state enterprises for special disciplines risks violating the long-standing approach of neutrality with regard to state versus private ownership in economic policy.  Doing so can undermine the pluralism of social and economic systems on which multilateral trade liberalization depends. Third, a number of issues that are raised through the “competitive neutrality” rubric can be addressed through proper application of non-discrimination norms, such as a state enterprise like a liquor or cannabis monopoly using its commercial privileges to favor domestic products over imports, or state enterprises that are both gatekeepers in network industries (electricity or telecommunications) abusing the gate keeper function to favor themselves as predominant suppliers or domestic suppliers versus imports more generally.  In these kinds of cases, the behavior in question is discriminatory under GATT principles, and anti-trust conceptions of anti-competitive behavior are not necessary to capture and discipline it (or specialized rules already exist, such as the Telecommunications Reference Paper).   25 See generally THE WORLD BANK, BUREAUCRATS IN BUSINESS: THE ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP (1995) (offering a comparison, especially in chapter 3, between contracting with public managers as agents of state capitalism and contracting with private managers as agents of state capitalism).  26  See Jean Tirole, Hierarchies and Bureaucracies: On the Role of Collusion in Organizations, 2 J.L. ECON. & ORG.  181, 184 (1986). Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,832 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 Along similar lines, many of the supposed competitive advantages of state enterprises, or their capacity to distort competition through economic decision-making, are addressed through the Subsidies and Countervailing Measures Agreement, including the multi-faceted definition of “financial contribution” attributable to government. Fourth, the kinds of provisions favored by critics of state enterprises are found in trade and investment agreements, which address topics that have been consciously rejected as part of the WTO framework, namely investment and anti-trust.  Bringing these topics in by the back door, to target state enterprises specifically, circumvents the need to obtain a consensus among WTO Members that now the time is right to commence negotiations in these areas (the EU has long wanted these matters dealt with in WTO negotiations but has accepted very reluctantly their removal at the Cancun Ministerial summit).27  Applying anti-trust norms to state enterprises without introducing such principles for private firms would create a bias against social and economic systems favoring an active state sector.  This seems arbitrary and unjustified at a time when many key concerns about anti-competitive conduct, and abuse of economic power more generally, focus on private entities such as Amazon, Facebook, and Google. At the same time, I see value in efforts at greater transparency and information exchange about state enterprises through policy dialogue and perhaps eventually voluntary understandings of best practices, rather than rules that are characteristic of traditional WTO law.  Such efforts could be built into the current plurilateral WTO negotiations on investment facilitation.  Establishing the principle of non-discrimination between like enterprises, national treatment as applied to investment might be seen as extension of the non-discrimination norm already applied to goods and services, subject to public policy exceptions of the kind found in the GATT.  But transparency and information exchange should not be limited to state enterprises. They should also create more openness concerning ownership structures in the case of private economic actors, with a view to removing policy distortions based on the form of ownership (those designed, for instance, to avoid taxation in high-tax jurisdictions).   27 See Amrita Narlikar & Rorden Wilkinson, Collapse at the WTO: A Cancun Post-Mortem, 25 THIRD WORLD Q. 447, 450 (2004). https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 833 II. STATE ENTERPRISE AND THE GATT CASE LAW Mavroidis and Sapir claim that state involvement in the economy by the original participants of the GATT “was confined to a few cases with special circumstances.” 28  A vast literature in economic history and political economy shows that the reverse is true.  The public sector played a crucial role in post-war economic construction in virtually every major country in Western Europe.  As Paul Cohen observes: Between 1944 and 1946, the state took control of businesses in energy, transportation, and finance. Private coal companies were reorganized into the public mining giant Charbonnages de France; gas and electricity producers were likewise nationalized to create Électricité de France and Gaz de France. The state absorbed Air France. It nationalized the country’s eleven largest insurance companies, along with Banque de France and the four biggest commercial banks (including Crédit Lyonnais, Société Générale, and what would later become BNP). . . . Taken together, these measures transformed the state into a giant economic actor: in 1946, it directly controlled 98 percent of coal production, 95 percent of electricity, 58 percent of the banking sector, 38 percent of automobile production, and 15 percent of total GDP. Beginning with Jean Monnet, the first director of the General Commissariat for Planning, the government managed public enterprises and drafted five-year plans in order to shape long-term economic development.29 In the case of the United Kingdom, Eichengreen & Ritschl observe: Nationalization proceeded from the Bank of England, the coal industry and BOAC in 1946 to the railways, waterways and electricity in 1947, gas in 1948, and iron and steel in 1949.   28    MAVROIDIS & SAPIR, supra note 16, at 69.   29 Paul Cohen, Lessons from the Nationalization Nation: State-Owned Enterprises in France, DISSENT (2010), https://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/lessons-from-the-nationalization-nation-state-owned-enterprises-in-france [https://perma.cc/Y7GF-DLHG]. Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,834 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 By 1951 more than two million workers were employed in public corporations.30 As for West Germany, Eichengreen and Ritschl further note that the Marshall Plan and other public funds and state-owned banks were the major sources of financing for coal, steel, public utilities, and transport.31 The state participated in the economy as a financier rather than a direct owner of industrial assets, while greatly influencing prices, wages, and production through corporatist bargaining of the social contract.  According to Vitois, the Bank for Reconstruction (Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau) successfully oversaw the rebuilding of the German economy after World War II.32 One of the architects of what would eventually become the GATT, James Meade (a United Kingdom government official), wrote in his 1942 “Proposal for an International Commercial Union”: “. . .  the removal of trade restrictions do [sic] not, however, imply laissez-faire and are in no way incompatible with a system of state trading.”33  Alexandre Kojeve, the French left-wing philosopher who chaired the sub-committing charged with drafting of the GATT, saw the predominant emerging socio-economic model in the post-war West as one combining elements of both socialism and capitalism, a mixture of private and public enterprise.34 While there was thus considerable awareness of the issue of states as market participants in the first decades of the GATT, the significant role of state capitalism in European reconstruction almost naturally led to the view that state enterprise in the broadest sense (including the provision of advantages or privileges to privately-owned firms) was a perfectly legitimate tool of economic   30 Barry Eichengreen & Albrecht Ritschl, Understanding West German Economic Growth in the 1950s 27 (London Sch. of Econ., Dep’t of Econ. Hist. Working Paper No. 113/08, 2008), https://www.lse.ac.uk/Economic-History/Assets/Documents/WorkingPapers/Economic-History/2008/WP113.pdf [ https://perma.cc/VR33-3Y2Q].  31 Id. at 30.  32 Sigurt Vitois, Financial Systems and Industrial Policy in Germany and Great Britain: The Limits of Convergence 14 (WZB Berlin Soc. Ctr., Working Paper No. FS I 95-311, 1995), http://bibliothek.wzberlin.de/pdf/1995/i95-311.pdf. [https://perma.cc/BD9A-DYFF].  33 James E. Meade, A Proposal for an International Commercial Union, reprinted in DOUGLAS A. IRWIN ET AL., THE GENESIS OF THE GATT annex A-2, at 214 (2008).   34  Robert Howse, Kojeve’s Latin Empire, HOOVER INST. (Aug. 1, 2004), https://www.hoover.org/research/kojeves-latin-empire [https://perma.cc/76WC-5VMY]. https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 835 policy.  This is reflected most clearly in the statement of a GATT Committee in 1964: “the General Agreement [does not] sanction discrimination against State-trading enterprises which are, in this regard, placed on the same basis as any other enterprise.”35 At the same time, GATT panels consistently found GATT Contracting Parties responsible for conduct of state enterprises that would, if engaged in by the state itself, violate GATT norms of non-discrimination.  Indeed, as we shall see, state influence or guidance of private actors could suffice to trigger responsibility.  State ownership and/or control certainly would.  Thus, a doctrine developed that, while the GATT system does not prefer or discriminate in favor of private enterprise relative to state enterprise, state enterprise may not be used (overtly or indirectly) as a vehicle for circumvention of GATT obligations. The 1988 GATT Panel Canada – Provincial Liquor Boards (EEC) held Canada responsible for practices of provincial liquor monopolies that were government-owned, despite Canada’s insistence that these entities had a “commercial” profit-making mandate.36 This case is an illustration that, quite apart from Article XVII, the GATT was well-designed to prevent circumvention of obligations through the conduct of state enterprises.   The panel found that the practice of higher mark ups for imported alcoholic beverages than domestic products undermined Canada’s commitments under Article II:4 of the GATT.  Article II:4 prohibits the circumvention of tariff bindings through the protectionist conduct of monopolies, either state owned or established or authorized by the state.37   35  Panel Report, Report of the Committee on the Legal and Institutional Framework of the GATT in Relation to Less-Developed Countries, ¶ 10, WTO Doc. L/2281 (adopted Oct. 26, 1964) [hereinafter Report of Institutional Framework].  36  Panel Report, Canada – Import, Distribution and Sale of Alcoholic Drinks by Canadian Provincial Marketing Agencies, ¶¶ 4.8-4.16, WTO Doc. L/6304 (adopted Mar. 22, 1988) [hereinafter 1988 Sale of Alcoholic Drinks by Canadian Provincial Marketing Agencies].  37   GATT, supra note 15,  at art. 2 (“If any contracting party establishes, maintains or authorizes, formally or in effect, a monopoly of the importation of any product described in the appropriate Schedule annexed to this Agreement, such monopoly shall not, except as provided for in that Schedule or as otherwise agreed between the parties which initially negotiated the concession, operate so as to afford protection on the average in excess of the amount of protection provided for in that Schedule. The provisions of this paragraph shall not limit the use by contracting parties of any form of assistance to domestic producers permitted by other provisions of this Agreement.”). Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,836 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 The Interpretative Note for Article II:4 provides for application of this discipline by reference to Article 31:4 of the Havana Charter, which stipulates, in relevant part:  The import duty negotiated under paragraph 2… shall represent the maximum margin by which the price charged by the import monopoly for the imported product (exclusive of internal taxes conforming to the provisions of Article 18, transportation, distribution and other expenses incident to the purchase, sale or further processing, and a reasonable margin of profit) may exceed the landed cost.38  As the Panel noted, the provincial liquor boards could charge markups on imported products in excess of those on domestic products. where justified by additional costs associated with transportation, marketing, etc., and the need for a “reasonable” profit margin.  Beyond this, the provincial boards’ markups constituted violations of Article II:4, because they undermined Canada’s bound commitments to market access (on tariffs and other duties and charges) in Article II.  While applying Article II:4 as a specialized legal norm directed at the situation of import monopolies, the Panel also suggested that greater markups for imported than domestic alcoholic beverages might violate National Treatment (Article III:4 of the GATT). In addition, the Panel held that liquor board practices of limiting listings of imported alcoholic beverages constituted a violation of Article XI:139 of the GATT:  The Panel observed that the note to Articles XI, XII, XIII, XIV and XVIII provided that throughout these Articles “the terms ‘import restrictions and ‘export restrictions’ include restrictions made effective through state-trading operations”. The Panel considered it significant that the note referred to “restrictions made effective through state-trading operations” and not to “import restrictions”…. The Panel   38    Havana Charter for an International Trade Organization art. 31 ¶ 4, U.N. Doc. E/Conf. 2/78 (Mar. 24, 1948).  39 GATT, supra note 15, at art. 11.1 (“No prohibitions or restrictions other than duties, taxes or other charges, whether made effective through quotas, import or export licences or other measures, shall be instituted or maintained by any contracting party on the importation of any product of the territory of any other contracting party or on the exportation or sale for export of any product destined for the territory of any other contracting party.”) https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 837 considered that systematic discriminatory practices of the kind referred to should be considered as restrictions made effective through “other measures” contrary to the provisions of Article XI:1.40   In other words. any practice of a state enterprise, regardless of its form, that has effects on market access equivalent to an import restriction will violate the GATT. In a second case concerning Canadian provincial liquor boards, Canada – Provincial Liquor Boards (US),41 the Panel again held Canada responsible for the discriminatory practices of provincial liquor boards, without the need to invoke Article XVII.  One of the practices in question was the setting of a minimum price for beer.  While this minimum price was origin-neutral, the Panel had no difficulty finding that it violated Article III:4 National Treatment, because the price was set such as to prevent American brewers from exploiting their cost advantage relative to Canadian competitors.42 The Panel also found that the practice of having different delivery systems for domestic and imported beer violated the National Treatment obligation of the GATT to the extent that domestic beer producers were given the option of private delivery at a competitive cost, whereas producers of imported beer did not have this option.43 The willingness in the Canada liquor cases to attribute discriminatory practices of state enterprises to the state itself was paralleled by other developments in GATT case law.  In the Canada-FIRA,44 Japan-Semiconductors,45 and Japan-Agricultural Products cases, the Panels attributed to the respondent state as violations of the   40 1988 Sale of Alcoholic Drinks by Canadian Provincial Marketing Agencies, supra note 36, ¶ 4.24.  41 Panel Report, Canada – Import, Distribution and Sale of Certain Alcoholic Drinks by Provincial Marketing Agencies, WTO Doc. DS17/R (adopted Feb. 18, 1992) [hereinafter Canada- Provincial Marketing Agencies].  42 MAVROIDIS & SAPIR, supra note 16, at 120 (claiming that there “is no case law” under the GATT or WTO that addresses minimum sales prices). But the Canadian beer minimum price example shows that this is not so.  This is another example of how lack of attention to the existing jurisprudential resources in the GATT/WTO legal system may lead Mavrodis and Sapir to hasty conclusions about the need for new rules.  43 Canada- Provincial Marketing Agencies, supra note 41, ¶¶ 5.13-5.16.  44 Report of the Panel, Canada – Administration of the Foreign Investment Review Act, L/5504 (Feb. 7, 1984), GATT BISD (30th Supp.), at 140 [hereinafter Canada - FIRA].  45 Report of the Panel, Japan – Trade in Semi-Conductors, L/6309 (May 4, 1988), GATT BISD (35th Supp.), at 116 (1989), [hereinafter Japan – Semi-Conductors].  Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,838 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 GATT the conduct of non-state actors that was susceptible to having been influenced by government, even by means of informal pressure or non-mandatory practices such as “administrative guidance” of the private sector (the case of Japan). 46  Indeed, any action by government likely to induce discriminatory conduct could be considered as falling within the expression “laws, regulations, and requirements” in GATT Article III:4.47 Early in the WTO era, WTO Panels synthesized and affirmed the GATT jurisprudential acquis on attribution and state responsibility.  In Canada-Periodicals, the WTO Panel examined, inter alia, certain pricing policies of the Canada Post Corporation, a state enterprise that nevertheless had an independent corporate status under Canadian law.48 Canada claimed that the pricing policies of Canada Post were part of its “commercial operations” and not governmental measures. The claimant, the United States, maintained that since Canada Post was owned and controlled by Canada, all such practices should be attributed to it.  Thus, as the Appellate Body put it: The United States argues that Canada Post is a government entity fully subject to Canadian Government direction because it is a wholly-government-owned, government-created chartered body, managed by a board of directors appointed by the Canadian Government. Canada argues that the different rates charged by Canada Post are a reflection of competitive situations and that the degree of control the Government exercises over Canada Post’s commercial operations (including delivery of periodicals) is one dictated by the Government shareholder’s interests. In other words, Canada argues here that Canada Post’s pricing policy is not a governmental measure subject to Article III:4. The essential question then is whether Canada Post is implementing Canadian Government policy in such a manner that its postal rates on periodicals may be viewed as governmental regulations or requirements for the purposes of Article III:4.49   46    Id.    47 Canada-FIRA, supra note 44, ¶ 5.4.   48 Canada-Periodicals, supra note 20, ¶ 5.35.   49    Id. ¶ 5.34. https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 839 The panel went on to find that Canada Post operated under “governmental instructions” and that even though Canada Post had a commercial “mandate,” this commercial mandate was itself derived from governmental decisions.  Given the level of control that Canada was able to exercise over Canada Post, it was implausible that Canada Post would have maintained discriminatory pricing practices that advantaged Canadian periodicals, unless these practices aligned with government policy.50   In sum, the doctrine on attribution and state responsibility as it applies to state enterprises focuses on the ability of government to control or direct the enterprise and its general dependency on governmental action.  The government need not have instructed or directed, or even have recommended the challenged measures itself (here, pricing of delivery services that were not part of Canada Post’s universal service mandate and monopoly in relation to letter mail). In a later dispute, Japan-Film, the WTO panel articulated the doctrine at a higher level of generality: action may be attributed to the state “if there is sufficient government involvement with it . . . . Thus, that possibility will need to be examined on a case-by-case basis.” 51  Ownership and/or control constitutes “sufficient government involvement,”  because the government can use these tools whenever it sees fit to align, or realign, the conduct of the enterprise with its political and policy priorities. It is understandable that managers in state enterprises will often attempt to anticipate the government’s concerns, avoiding such intervention. Finally in the recent Saudi Arabia-Intellectual Property dispute, the adopted panel reiterated the approach to attribution and state responsibility in the GATT/WTO system: . . . [A] Member is responsible for actions at all levels of government (local, municipal, federal) and for all actions taken by any agency within any level of government.  Thus, the responsibility of Members under international law applies irrespective of the branch of government at the origin of the action having international repercussions. . . . As one panel observed, “what appear on their face to be private actions may nonetheless be attributable to a government because of some governmental connection to or   50 Id. ¶ 5.35  51 Japan-Film, supra note 22, ¶ 10.56.   Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,840 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 endorsement of those actions”.  While there must be a sufficient nexus between the action of private entities and the action of a government (or other organ of the Member) for that government to be held responsible for that action, “it is necessary to take into account that there is a broad variety of forms of government of action that can be effective in influencing the conduct of private parties”.  The fact that acts or omissions of private parties “may involve some element of private choice” does not negate the possibility of those acts or omissions being attributable to a Member insofar as they reflect decisions that are not independent of one or more measures taken by a government (or other organ of the Member).52 III. GATT ARTICLE XVII: STATE TRADING ENTERPRISES AND JUDICIAL ECONOMY Critics of state enterprises often buttress their argument about the inadequacy of existing WTO rules by pointing to the fact that dispute settlement organs have largely avoided adjudicating claims under GATT Article XVII, which is specifically directed to the conduct of state trading enterprises, including both enterprises under state ownership and control as well as those granted special trading rights or monopolies.  GATT Article XVII is “toothless” and irrelevant, US business lobby group asserted in its testimony before the Senate Finance Committee.53 The lobby group Coalition for a Prosperous America is correct that Article XVII has been seldomly applied in WTO adjudication. Yet this lack of use does not suggest the ineffectiveness of Article XVII so much as the adequacy of more general GATT disciplines on non-discrimination for disciplining state enterprises and preventing the use of state firms to circumvent WTO obligations.  Thus, in the cases discussed in Part II, Article XVII, while usually pleaded by   52 Panel Report, Saudi Arabia—Measures Concerning the Protection of Intellectual Property Rights, ¶¶ 7.50-7.51, WTO Doc. WT/DS567/R (adopted June 16, 2020) [hereinafter Saudi Arabia – IP] (footnotes omitted).  53  Michael Sturmo, Written Testimony Before the Senate Finance Committee, COAL. FOR PROSPEROUS AM. (Aug. 12, 2020), https://prosperousamerica.org/written-testimony-before-the-senate-finance-committee/ [https://perma.cc/49EW-ULNW]. https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 841 claimants, and was the subject of some obiter dicta,54 does not need to be applied to find that the defending state had violated the GATT. Article XVII (1) reads as follows: 1.*  (a)  Each contracting party undertakes that if it establishes or maintains a State enterprise, wherever located, or grants to any enterprise, formally or in effect, exclusive or special privileges,* such enterprise shall, in its purchases or sales involving either imports or exports, act in a manner consistent with the general principles of non-discriminatory treatment prescribed in this Agreement for governmental measures affecting imports or exports by private traders. (b)  The provisions of subparagraph (a) of this paragraph shall be understood to require that such enterprises shall, having due regard to the other provisions of this Agreement, make any such purchases or sales solely in accordance with commercial considerations,* including price, quality, availability, marketability, transportation and other conditions of purchase or sale, and shall afford the enterprises of the other contracting parties adequate opportunity, in accordance with customary business practice, to compete for participation in such purchases or sales. (c)  No contracting party shall prevent any enterprise (whether or not an enterprise described in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph) under its jurisdiction from acting in accordance with the principles of subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph.55 According to Mavroidis’ reading of the negotiating history, what animated the drafters of Article XVII was the fear that “through the operation of [State-trading Enterprises], market economies might be circumventing their obligation to avoid discriminating between domestic and imported goods.”56 The non-circumvention function of Article XVII is most clearly displayed in the obligation in paragraph (1)(c), which  prohibits GATT Contracting Parties from   54 MAVROIDIS & SAPIR, supra note 16, at 118-20. These dicta have not had any impact on the development of case law, though they have been the subject of occasional academic commentary.  55    GATT, supra note 15, at art. 17 (emphasis added).   56 PETROS MAVROIDIS, THE REGULATION OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 400 (1st ed., 2016). Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,842 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 directing a state enterprise to engage in discriminatory conduct contrary to GATT principles and in particular to make purchases or sales based on other than commercial considerations.  In the case law discussed in Part II, Canada had mooted a different view, which was that Article XVII was a lex specialis on discrimination for state trading enterprises such that so long as such enterprises operate according to “commercial considerations” within the meaning of Article XVII(1)(b), no claim can be brought for discrimination under other provisions of the GATT, such as Article III:4 or Article XI.  Put slightly differently, Article XVII(b) would constitute a defense against state responsibility for violations of primary obligations such as Article III:4 and Article XI. In the WTO Canada-Wheat Board dispute, the claimant the United States urged a yet different view of the role of “commercial considerations.” According to the US, the obligation to act in accordance with commercial considerations constrained a state trading enterprise in using market power acquired through rights conferred by the government, including monopoly rights.57 On the US view, such behavior would violate Article XVII, regardless of whether there was discrimination of the kind that violated other operative provisions of the GATT, such as Article III:4.  Thus, the US asserted that inherent in the kind of monopoly rights granted the Canadian Wheat Board was the facilitation of anti-competitive conduct, in the sense of price discrimination among export markets. The US used the concept of “commercial considerations” to make an argument that Article XVII, rather than being an anti-circumvention provision, covered conduct not otherwise disciplined under GATT; Article XVII(b) created an independent obligation not dependent on a finding of discrimination under Article XVII(1)(a). The GATT contains neither a code on anti-trust nor any obligation of non-discriminatory treatment as between like or similar enterprises or investments. The WTO Trade-Related Investment Measures Agreement (TRIMs) addresses non-discrimination but only through affirming that treatment of foreign investment must not result in discrimination between like imported and domestic   57   Appellate Body Report, Canada – Measures Relating to Exports of Wheat and Treatment of Imported Grain, ¶ 146, 147, WTO Doc. WT/DS267/AB/R (adopted Aug. 30, 2004) [hereinafter Canada-Wheat Board]. https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 843 products contrary to GATT Article III.58 By contrast, International Investment Agreements, or newer PTAs that cover both trade and investment, typically impose a National Treatment obligation with respect to investors and investments. This requires non-discriminatory treatment of investors or investments from other treaty parties where the latter are in like circumstances with domestic investors or investments.59 As the Appellate Body put it: “We see no basis for interpreting that provision as imposing comprehensive competition-law-type obligations on STEs, as the United States would have us do.” 60    Even if, for the sake of argument, the Appellate Body were wrong in assuming that Article XVII does not impose “competition-law type obligations,” the language of “commercial considerations” would not be adequate to articulating such obligations. Much anti-competitive behavior by private economic actors with market power is “commercial” in the sense that it is commercially rational for a profit-maximizing private monopolist to use its market power anti-competitively.  As Hoekman and Trachtman suggest, “what matters from the perspective of the WTO (Article XVII) is whether any observed price discrimination across foreign markets or between domestic and foreign markets would also be pursued by a private firm” that had market power. 61  They further note: “evidence of extensive product differentiation in the wheat market suggests that private firms would also pursue price discrimination strategies in markets where they have (some) pricing power.”62 In Canada-Wheat Board, the Appellate Body ultimately found that “commercial considerations” qualifies the “scope” of the general non-discrimination obligation in XVII(1)(a).  The obligations of non-discrimination reflected in the other provisions of the GATT are the controlling law, such that if there is no apparent breach of those obligations, there is no need for addressing “commercial considerations.”   58 Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures Agreement arts. 2-3, Apr. 15, 1994, Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, Annex 1A, 1868 U.N.T.S. 186 [hereinafter TRIMS Agreement].  59 See U.N. Conference on Trade and Development, National Treatment, U.N. Doc. UNCTAD/ITE/IIT/11 33-34 (1999).  60 Canada-Wheat Board, supra note 57, ¶ 145.   61   Bernard Hoekman & Joel P. Trachtman, Canada-Wheat: Discrimination, Non-Commercial Considerations, and State Trading Enterprises 9 (World Bank Dev. Rsch. Grp., Policy Research Working Paper No. 4337, 2007), https://ssrn.com/abstract=1011084.  62  Id. Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,844 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 As the Appellate Body emphasized:  . . .  even if Article XVII:1 itself did not exist, this would not imply that STEs would be subject to no disciplines under the GATT 1994…. We need not identify, for purposes of this appeal, all of the provisions of the GATT 1994 that may apply to STEs, nor consider how these disciplines interact with and reinforce each other. We do, however, believe that these other provisions reveal that, even in 1947, the negotiators of the GATT created a number of complementary requirements to address the different ways in which STEs could be used by a contracting party to seek to circumvent its obligations under the GATT…. This is also consistent with the view that Article XVII:1 was intended to impose disciplines on one particular type of STE behaviour, namely discriminatory behaviour, rather than to constitute a comprehensive code of conduct for STEs.63 At the time the GATT came into force, it was unclear how the concept of discrimination would be articulated with respect to the National Treatment and MFN obligations of the GATT. Rather late in the GATT era, the case law began to consolidate behind an approach that emphasizes equality of competitive opportunities as the core concept of non-discrimination, rather than protectionist intent or whether measures are based on overt distinctions between products of different national origins; the competition-based approach became the dominant and eventually the exclusive one in the WTO era.64    63 Canada-Wheat Board, supra note 57, ¶ 98 (emphasis added).  64 The key judicial precedents include: Panel Report, Japan – Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages, WTO Doc. WT/DS8/R, WT/DS10/R, WT/DS11/R (adopted Nov. 1, 1996), modified by Appellate Body Report, Japan – Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages, WTO Doc. WT/DS8/AB/R, WT/DS10/AB/R, WT/DS11/AB/R (adopted Oct. 4, 1996) [hereinafter Japan-Alcoholic Beverages]; Appellate Body Report, European Communities – Measures Affecting Asbestos and Asbestos-Containing Products, WTO Doc. WT/DS135/AB/R (adopted Apr. 5, 2001) [hereinafter EC-Asbestos]; Appellate Body Report, European Communities – Measures Prohibiting the Importation and Marketing of Seal Products, ¶ 5.82, WTO Doc. WT/DS400/AB/R WT/DS401/AB/R (adopted May 22, 2014).   In this last case the Appellate Body made it clear that the competition-based approach to discrimination applies both to MFN and National Treatment: “we observe that, notwithstanding the textual differences between Articles I:1 and III:4, each provision is concerned, fundamentally, with prohibiting discriminatory measures by requiring, in the context of Article I:1,   https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 845 In the Canada liquor board cases, one can observe the GATT Panels assessing the impact of the state enterprises’ retailing practices on competitive opportunities for imported relative to domestic products. Markup, listing, and minimum price requirements all operated in such a way as to alter the conditions of competition in favor of domestic alcoholic beverages, thus denying equality of competitive opportunities.  This reading of GATT Article III as requiring that state enterprises’ trading practices provide equality of competitive opportunities seems, in effect, to subsume fully the obligation in Article XVII to afford adequate opportunity to compete. Under the equality of competitive opportunities approach to MFN and National Treatment, there is a focus on commercially relevant factors in determining whether products are “like.” Some early jurisprudence, and much academic commentary, suggested that likeness analysis could use government policy objectives like environmental protection to distinguish products as “unlike” even if they have similar physical characteristics or are in market competition. The WTO Appellate Body from its earliest rulings adopted an approach to likeness that is based on the 1970 GATT Working Party on Border Tax Adjustment.65  The factors determinative of likeness in this framework are physical characteristics, end uses and consumer tastes and habits.  There is no explicit role for public policy. This market competition-based approach obviously dovetails with GATT Article XVII(1)(b), which refers to price, quality, availability, marketability, transportation, and other conditions of purchase or sale.  All of these relate to one or more of a product’s physical characteristics or end uses, and/or affect market behavior of consumers. In sum, thanks to the evolution of GATT/WTO non-discrimination jurisprudence, an assessment of the practices of state enterprises under Articles (1)(a) and (1)(b) will likely come to the same conclusion as an inquiry into whether such conduct is attributable to the state as a breach of other GATT provisions on non-discrimination, such as MFN and National Treatment (along  equality of competitive opportunities for like imported products from all Members, and, in the context of Article III:4, equality of competitive opportunities for imported products and like domestic products. It is for this reason that neither Article I:1 nor Article III:4 require a demonstration of the actual trade effects of a specific measure.”  65 See Japan-Alcoholic Beverages, supra note 64; EC-Asbestos, supra note 64. Published by Penn Carey Law: Legal Scholarship Repository,846 U. Pa. J. Int'l L. [Vol. 43:4 the lines of the Canadian liquor board cases and the Canada-Periodicals case).  Article XVII and other non-discrimination norms in the GATT are mutually reinforcing or complementary: there is no reason to interpret Article XVII(1)(b) as branching out in a different direction. At the same time, whether there is a violation of MFN and/or National Treatment under, respectively, Article I and III of the GATT or a violation of Article XVII, the scope for a WTO Member to justify the state enterprise behavior as directed to a legitimate public policy objective is the same. The Article XX General Exceptions clause (covering objectives such as protection of public morals, human or animal life and health, and conservation of exhaustible natural resource) applies to the entire GATT treaty.66 There is one plausible line of argument that Article XVII articulates not just the principle of anti-circumvention but also a distinctive primary obligation.  Thus, Article XVII might be read as an obligation on a state that establishes a state trading enterprise to use its powers to design, control, and supervise the conduct of that entity in such a way that it does not engage in discrimination of the kind prohibited under other Articles of the GATT. This would address the concern that state trading enterprises might well not be transparent in their buying and selling practices, making it difficult to identify specific decisions of those enterprises in conflict with GATT non-discrimination principles. Also, managers of state enterprises, anticipating that their political owners/controllers would approve of such conduct, might be inclined to engage in favoritism toward domestic economic actors. If so, the imposing a positive obligation on the state to preclude such behavior of a state enterprise through the way in which its mandate is established, for example, or the way managers must account for their performance, might make sense.  Such a positive obligation would still be ministerial to the overall non-circumvention function of Article XVII.  But is such a function needed if (as is indicated by the GATT cases) dispute panels are prepared to attribute presumptively discriminatory conduct of state enterprises to the state, with the existence of discrimination being determined by an approach that emphasizes the conditions of competition in the marketplace?   66 How the legitimate policies listed in Article XX are weighed in relation to obligations such as MFN and National treatment is presented in detail in Robert Howse, The World Trade Organization 20 Years On: Global Governance by Judiciary, 27 EUR. J. INT’L L. 9, 45-53 (2016). https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jil/vol43/iss4/12022] Official Business 847 At the same time, Article XVII reflects the understanding that not all issues concerning state enterprises may be capable of resolution under general GATT rules or indeed the Article’s own provisions.  Thus, Article XVII calls for “negotiations on a reciprocal and mutually advantageous basis designed to limit or reduce” obstacles to trade from state trading enterprises.  The reference to reciprocity seems to indicate what is intended is not additional general rules on state trading enterprises but adjustment of existing aspects of the GATT/WTO bargain in the light of specific concerns between two or more WTO Members.  These concerns would relate to specific state-trading enterprise practices and their impact on trade of one or more Members.  Accordingly, Article XVII(4) allows any individual contracting party (WT