The Story and Sisterhood Behind the World’s First Feminist Economic Recovery Plan for COVID-19

      The Story and Sisterhood Behind theWorld’s First Feminist EconomicRecovery Plan for COVID-19 Yvonne Mahelona, Tamera Heine, Khara Jabola-Carolus, andAmanda Shaw Coronavirus is a disaster for feminism—so said a prominent voice in White feminism that went viral during the crisis. We disagree. While COVID-19 presents an existential challenge to White feminism, it is an opportunity for transnational feminism, also known as “glocal feminism,” which we understand as stretching beyond national borders, building bridges between women’s struggles against patriarchy across multiple contexts. This framework is important for many women whose choices are mediated by imperialism and colonization. After over a century of White feminism in the lead, Hawaiʻi’s women, māhū, and LGBTQ people enjoy nowhere near the freedom held prior to the 1800s. Col­onization’s ongoing processes and institutions leave us ill-equipped to weather the astounding turmoil brought on by COVID-19. The crisis has worsened gender inequality. Our lives make the case against another century of incrementalist reform. It is our time to define the agenda going forward. We reject inclusion, equality, and rights within patriarchal systems and destructive industries. We cannot delay a transition away from militarism, tourism, fossil fuels, prisons, and the commercial sex industry. Deregulation is not the answer. Reform is not the answer. Building Bridges, Not Walking on Backs: A Femi­nist Economic Recovery Plan for COVID-19 is a new playbook for structural change, led by working-class, Native, and transnational values that emphasize the sacred importance of land and those qualities associated with the feminine, aikāne, and māhū. Though the brainchild of the Hawaiʻi State Commission on the Status of Women (HSCSW), Building Bridges, Not Walking on Backs was written by a collec­tive of women outside of government through a collaborative process. The Com­mission’s plan is the first and (thus far) only government-proposed feminist economic recovery plan. Its publication created a global outpouring of interest, from CNN to the United Nations, which contacted HSCSW to learn about the plan’s recommendations and origin story. Several nations and US states are current­ly considering emulating the plan. Citing Hawaiʻi as the inspiration, civil society 223 224 The Value of Hawai‘ i 3 groups in Northern Ireland, Canada, and parts of India have put forward their own feminist recovery plans.The culture surrounding any government, law, or policy helps shape it. Like most radical breaks, the roots and conversations contributing to Hawaiʻi’s feminist economic recovery plan trace back to the grassroots women’s movement and the creation of AF3IRM Hawaiʻi in 2016. A completely unfunded, unstaffed transnational feminist organization supporting Native, Black, and immigrant wom­en’s leadership across sectors, through trust-building and visibility, AF3IRM has created a space for women, femme-identified, queer, and non-binary people to theory-build from their lives. Because white and affluent women dominate “women’s rights” spaces in Hawaiʻi, and politicians and the professional class of advocates are not representa­tive of our communities, women of color must navigate gatekeeping systems built to silence, disempower, and disenfranchise us. We are told the issues rampant in our communities, even women’s inequality itself, are not real. Other government agencies and COVID task forces have not adequately planned around, funded, or counteracted rampant male violence, increased sex trafficking, and interruptions to reproductive health care and caregiving. Creating structural change that centers our experiences requires leadership backed by a movement. One of AF3IRM’s most important functions is holding its organizers accountable to its working-class, Native, and transnational values. The plan was produced by women within this sisterhood, and from a group of formidable women outside of the organization: the Feminist COVID-19 Response Team. From a Kanaka Perspective The Feminist Economic Recovery Plan’s demands are long overdue. Concrete poli­cies such as universal guaranteed income, real onramps not rhetoric for women into green jobs, and a public maternal care infrastructure are the first needed steps toward genuine safety, sovereignty, and sustainability, especially for Native, Black, and immigrant women. Our feminism seeks to end harmful hierarchies, including settler over Indigenous. Because we revere women and land as sacred over the profit of the privileged few, we resist a rebuilding of the economy, and demand a remaking drawn from older systems. The plan also insists on centering feminist leadership. This is import­ant, because as grassroots feminist organizers in Hawaiʻi, we carry the most critical knowledge of the systems in place. We depend on them for survival. We are the ones these systems fail. We know what has not, and will never work for women. Though we cannot rely on these systems or their leaders, we still demand accountability as we build anew. Abolishing colonial systems is not just about burn­ing and tearing down, but about building new structures within the shells of the old. A popular ‘ōlelo no e̒au, or saying, for kānaka ʻōiwi is “i ka wā ma mua, ka wā 225 Mahelona, Heine, Jabola-Carolus, and Shaw, The Story and Sisterhood ma hope”—the future can be found in the past and in our past. Particularly import­ant to kanaka women is developing the social safety net around mothering and caregiving. Caregiving was a collectively supported integral part of the community, as were fishing, farming, and healing. These systems of distributed care beyond a Western patriarchal male-female couple have already existed. We have the perfect examples in the knowledge of our kūpuna. Sovereignty and liberation from capitalist patriarchy looks like recalling the ways of our ancestors, and building futures where caregiving and mothering are supported. Where we can move away from systems that are unsustainable because women of color especially bear the brunt of work in the home and their own work environments. Achieving safety and sustainability for women, māhū, and those in the darkest corners of the margins will benefit everyone. All this has inspired the feminist economic recovery plan. From a Micronesian PerspectiveThe plan offered, for the first time, an opportunity for Marshallese and Micronesian women to voice our concerns, and come up with our own culturally-relevant solu­tions. When the HSCSW encouraged us to create a taskforce, it was almost unheard of for a state agency not just to partner, to give us a seat at the table, but to provide funding for us to create and lead women-empowering community work­shops. Sadly, COVID-19 has put these educational events on hold. The pandemic has overwhelmed the women in the Micronesian community. In addition to being the primary caregivers, we must now be academic teachers, with limited English skills, little to no knowledge of school subjects, and sometimes no computer. Just helping our children with homework is a hurdle. Like many local families, we also live in multigenerational homes, and worry constantly about our elders’ higher risk from COVID-19. These are added pressures on top of being fur­loughed or working from home, cleaning, washing, and cooking. In Marshallese and many other Micronesian families, a mother’s work is never-ending. Familial, cultural, and societal obligations leave you with little to no room to think about yourself and your own well-being. Many of us go without health insurance, sacrific­ing our health for family needs. This is no surprise. Most of us are always in survival mode, constantly worrying about rent, food, and utilities. But from outside looking in, you may never know this. We are resilient, coming from a culture with familial values, where we pull strength from our faith, hold each other up, and discourage complaints. We hope that this Feminist Economic Recovery Plan can be an example of what genuine and successful partnering with Marshallese and Micronesian women looks like. We want them involved in all Hawaiʻi policymaking, ensuring that every­one has access to health care, and interpreters are readily available in all sectors. We dream of a time when each of our unique ethnicities is recognized and celebrated outside of our community. As the plan states, having navigators work with all 226 The Value of Hawai‘ i 3organizations to develop and implement programs addressing community needs would make a huge difference. Place-based childcare, financial literacy, support groups, and capacity development for youth would be good starts. * * * New economies require a painful birthing process. This is underway, but much work remains to deliver a transnational feminist future by building bridges across movements. Naysayers should realize that we are unshakably rooted in our history, recovering the importance of wāhine and māhū in our societies while renewing and strengthening connections with our Pacific family in the present. We are proving that the logics of women-centered systems are the key to a local and global recovery from COVID-19. Work Cited Building Bridges, Not Walking on Backs: A Feminist Economic Recovery Plan for COVID-19. Hawaiʻi State Commission on the Status of Women, Department of Human Services, State of Hawaiʻi, 14 Apr. 2020, https://humanservices.hawaii.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2020/04/4.13.20-Final-Cover-D2-Feminist-Economic-Recovery-D1.pdf. Yvonne Mahelona is a kanaka ʻōiwi organizer, co-coordinator of AF3IRM Hawaiʻi, and a birthworker and midwifery student committed to healing herself, her ʻohana, and communities by telling stories of their experiences and survival. Tamera Heine is a proud Marshallese woman and mother to Omakkai who works and advocates for her community and her brothers and sisters in the larger Micronesian region. Khara Jabola-Carolus is the executive director of the Hawaiʻi State Commission on the Status of Women, dedicated to restoring the revered status of women, femme-identified, and non-binary people in Hawaiʻi. She is the mother of Halepueo Kūpa a̒ and Laguna Kekipi. Amanda Shaw is an independent feminist researcher and activist raised on O a̒hu, with family origins in the UK and Europe via Appalachia and the Ozark mountains. 