New incentives for businesses to train their employees are needed for economic recovery from COVID-19

New	incentives	for	businesses	to	train	theiremployees	are	needed	for	economic	recovery	fromCOVID-19	COVID-19	has	prompted	changes	in	consumer	spending	patterns,	business	practices	and	working	arrangements,many	of	which	are	likely	to	persist	beyond	the	crisis	with	implications	for	the	demand	for	certain	occupations	orskills.	To	date,	workers	in	low	paid	occupations	and	sectors,	and	those	that	are	younger,	have	suffered	the	most	inthe	labour	market,	threatening	to	widen	inequalities	and	damage	social	mobility	into	the	future.Increased	investment	in	skills	and	training	–	including	of	the	existing	workforce	–	was	already	called	for	before	thepandemic	(see,	for	example,	the	LSE	Growth	Commission)	in	order	to	address	longstanding	skills	gaps,	improveUK	productivity	performance,	and	build	resilience	to	technological	change.	Given	the	labour	market	displacementcaused	by	the	pandemic,	ongoing	(accelerated)	technical	change	and	the	zero-carbon	transition,	this	need	is	all	themore	urgent.	Investments	in	individuals’	skills	can	help	mitigate	the	risks	of	costly	labour	market	scarring	by	helpingbuild	resilience	to	change	and	employability	in	new	occupations	or	sectors	where	demand	is	growing.In	our	recent	report,	we	combine	a	wide	range	of	data	sources	to	document	trends	in	job-related	training	overrecent	decades.	We	also	offer	some	possible	interpretations	for	the	observed	changes	over	time	and	discuss	somepolicy	proposals	with	relevance	in	light	of	the	current	crisis	and	beyond.The	last	two	decades	have	seen	a	general	decline	in	job-related	training,	as	reported	by	workersThere	has	been	a	general	decline	in	training	participation	since	the	early	2000s	(Figure	1),	which	is	not	explained	byshifts	in	sectoral	or	occupational	composition	or	changing	working	arrangements.	The	decline	in	training	rates	hasbeen	particularly	felt	by	more	educated	and	younger	workers	and	by	those	in	technical	occupations,	whereas	lowerskilled	workers	have	consistently	received	less	training.Figure	1.	Training	participation	rate	in	the	UK,	relative	to	1995A.	Industry	and	occupation																																																																			B.	Part-time	and	self-employed 	Notes:	Sample	includes	workers	(employed	and	self-employed)	aged	16-65	in	private	sector.	The	solid	lines	show	participation	ratesrelative	to	the	level	in	1995.	The	dashed	lines	control	for	changes	in	the	composition	of	the	labour	market	by	industry,	occupationand	types	of	employment	as	indicated.	Source:	Quarter	2	UK	LFS	(1995-2019).LSE Business Review: New incentives for businesses to train their employees are needed for economic recovery from COVID-19 Page 1 of 6		Date originally posted: 2021-01-18Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2021/01/18/new-incentives-for-businesses-to-train-their-employees-are-needed-for-economic-recovery-from-covid-19/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/Our	analysis	also	shows	that	the	observed	decline	in	training	participation	was	not	compensated	by	individualsreceiving	training	of	a	longer	duration	or	improved	“quality”.Indeed,	country-level	statistics	from	the	European	Working	Conditions	Survey	show	that	while	UK	participationrates	are	relatively	high	in	an	international	comparison,	the	duration	of	the	average	training	course	is	shorter	in	theUK	relative	to	its	peers	(Figure	2).	Moreover,	the	UK	ranks	only	27th	out	of	35	countries	in	terms	of	the	share	oftrainees	who	strongly	agree	that	their	training	has	helped	to	improve	the	way	they	work.Figure	2.	International	comparison	in	the	share	of	training	of	at	least	6	days	durationNotes:	Aged	16-65	employed,	including	self-employed.	Source:	European	Working	Conditions	Survey,	2015.Firm	level	data	from	the	Employers	Skills	Survey	over	the	period	2011	and	2017	shows	that	while	trainingparticipation	reported	by	firms	has	remained	constant,	the	number	of	training	days	and	training	expenditure	pertrained	employee	has	fallen	by	18	per	cent	and	17	per	cent	respectively.	As	reported	in	Figure	3,	this	reduction	hasaffected	virtually	all	sectors.Figure	3.	Change	in	expenditure	and	training	days	per	trainee	by	industry,	2011-2017LSE Business Review: New incentives for businesses to train their employees are needed for economic recovery from COVID-19 Page 2 of 6		Date originally posted: 2021-01-18Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2021/01/18/new-incentives-for-businesses-to-train-their-employees-are-needed-for-economic-recovery-from-covid-19/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/Note:	Expenditure	deflated	in	2017	price	using	an	economic-wide	inflation	measure.	Source:	Employer	Skills	Survey	2018	reportPublicly	funded	training	participation	has	risen,	but	there	are	also	concerns	around	quality.	Against	thisbackdrop	of	declining	training	participation	in	the	aggregate,	publicly-funded	training	programmes	–	notablyapprenticeships	–	have	grown	in	importance	in	England	in	recent	decades.	Our	analysis	of	governmentadministrative	data	reveals	that,	thanks	to	a	large	increase	in	apprenticeship	starts,	the	share	of	workersparticipating	in	apprenticeships	has	grown	from	about	0.8	per	cent	in	2003	to	1.7	per	cent	in	2017.	Since	2007,much	of	this	growth	can	be	accounted	for	by	the	expansion	of	apprenticeships	among	25-65	year	old	workers;	Thiscan	clearly	be	seen	in	Figure	4,	which	plots	the	evolution	in	the	number	of	yearly	apprenticeship	starts	across	threemain	age	groups.	It	is	important	to	note	that	the	expansion	in	apprenticeship	numbers	has	been	accompanied	by	areduction	of	their	duration	since	2003.Figure	4.	Apprenticeship	starts	by	apprentices’	age	groupLSE Business Review: New incentives for businesses to train their employees are needed for economic recovery from COVID-19 Page 3 of 6		Date originally posted: 2021-01-18Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2021/01/18/new-incentives-for-businesses-to-train-their-employees-are-needed-for-economic-recovery-from-covid-19/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/Notes:	Apprenticeship	starts	count	the	number	of	new	apprenticeships	started	during	the	academic	year	(August	–	July)	in	England.Source:	Own	figures	from	ILR	(Department	for	Education).Training	has	taken	a	hit	since	the	onset	of	the	COVID-19	crisisWe	find	that	pre-pandemic	training	rates	have	tended	to	be	lower	in	the	sectors	and	occupations	where	working	athome	is	less	prevalent,	suggesting	that	many	of	those	most	affected	by	the	crisis	in	labour	market	terms	have	alsotended	to	receive	less	training	in	the	past.Amongst	those	in	employment,	the	training	rate	in	the	first	two	quarters	of	2020	declined	sharply.	This	is	to	beexpected	since	training	tends	to	be	a	discretionary	expenditure	for	firms,	and	given	the	disruptions	to	businessoperations	experienced	by	many	firms.	More	granular	analysis	suggests	that	this	decline	has	been	steeper	amongstyounger,	less	educated	workers.Figure	5.	Training	rate	since	the	pandemic		LSE Business Review: New incentives for businesses to train their employees are needed for economic recovery from COVID-19 Page 4 of 6		Date originally posted: 2021-01-18Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2021/01/18/new-incentives-for-businesses-to-train-their-employees-are-needed-for-economic-recovery-from-covid-19/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/Notes:	Sample	includes	workers	(employed	and	self-employed)	aged	16-65	in	private	sector,	LFS	person	weights	applied.	The	redline	shows	the	training	rate	relative	to	its	level	in	Q3	–	2019	normalised	to	100;	over	the	four	quarters	since.	Source:	QuarterlyLabour	Force	Survey,	2015	to	2020,	UK.Implications	for	policyThe	trends	we	outline	and	the	broader	evidence	suggest	that	new	or	enhanced	policies	to	increase	the	quantity	andquality	of	job-related	training	are	required,	particularly	for	younger	workers	or	those	with	lower	levels	of	educationalattainment	who	have	historically	received	little	training	and	have	borne	the	brunt	of	the	recent	economic	disruption.There	are	some	indications	that	firms	may	be	reluctant	or	unable	to	invest	more	in	their	employees’	training	due	toconcerns	about	returns	to	training	(especially	training	in	increasingly	important	transferable	skills)	and	tighteningfinancial	budgets.	This	calls	for	more	action	from	the	government	to	provide	firms	with	the	right	incentives.Increased	support	for	adult	education	and	training	announced	since	the	onset	of	COVID-19,	including	the	NationalSkills	Fund,	and	short-term	incentives	for	apprentices	are	a	welcome	first	step	in	this	direction.	In	our	report	wesketch	out	some	additional	policy	proposals:Human	capital	tax	credits:	Akin	to	existing	R&D	tax	credits,	they	would	incentivise	investment	in	workforcetraining	by	offering	a	tax	relief	to	financially	constrained	firms.	This	could	be	piloted	in	sectors	wheredisplacement	has	been	particularly	acute,	or	anticipated	(e.g.	greening	the	car	industry).A	more	broadly	defined	apprenticeship	levy:	In	its	current	version	the	levy	risks	favouring	training	of	moreexperienced	workers	rather	than	young	people	(for	whom	apprenticeships	may	be	more	adequate).	Reformsshould	be	considered	to	target	younger	workers	with	apprenticeships	while	broadening	the	use	of	levied	fundsfor	adult	workers.Further	devolution	of	skills	policy:	Further	devolution	of	apprenticeship	and	training	policy	should	beconsidered	where	better	local	knowledge	of	skills	gaps	can	increase	its	effectiveness.Job	creation	and	retraining	schemes:	Embedding	re-skilling	or	up-skilling	in	new	programmes	of	jobcreation,	including	those	associated	with	net-zero-aligned	investments	–	with	stronger	incentives	forbusinesses	and	support	for	individuals.♣♣♣Notes:LSE Business Review: New incentives for businesses to train their employees are needed for economic recovery from COVID-19 Page 5 of 6		Date originally posted: 2021-01-18Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2021/01/18/new-incentives-for-businesses-to-train-their-employees-are-needed-for-economic-recovery-from-covid-19/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/This	blog	post	expresses	the	views	of	its	author(s),	not	the	position	of	LSE	Business	Review	or	the	LondonSchool	of	Economics.Featured	image	by	ThisisEngineering	RAEng	on	UnsplashWhen	you	leave	a	comment,	you’re	agreeing	to	our	Comment	PolicyJiaqi	Li	is	a	research	assistant	for	Dr.	Anna	Valero	and	a	MRes/PhD	student	at	Warwick	University.Previously,	he	was	a	research	economist	at	National	Institute	of	Economic	and	Social	Research,while	undertaking	MSc	at	Warwick.		Guglielmo	Ventura	is	a	research	assistant	at	LSE’s	Centre	for	Economic	Performance’s	Centre	forVocational	Education	Research.	His	research	interests	include	education,	labour	markets	and	policyevaluation.		Anna	Valero	is	ESRC	innovation	fellow	at	LSE’s	Centre	for	Economic	Performance	(CEP).				LSE Business Review: New incentives for businesses to train their employees are needed for economic recovery from COVID-19 Page 6 of 6		Date originally posted: 2021-01-18Permalink: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2021/01/18/new-incentives-for-businesses-to-train-their-employees-are-needed-for-economic-recovery-from-covid-19/Blog homepage: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/