A Comparison of the Experiences of Economic Adaptation and Integration for Refugees and Asylum Seekers in Maine

The University of Maine
DigitalCommons@UMaine
Honors College
Spring 5-2016
A Comparison of the Experiences of Economic
Adaptation and Integration for Refugees and
Asylum Seekers in Maine
Grace Kiffney
University of Maine
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.library.umaine.edu/honors
Part of the Anthropology Commons, and the International Relations Commons
This Honors Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by DigitalCommons@UMaine. It has been accepted for inclusion in Honors College by
an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@UMaine. For more information, please contact um.library.technical.services@maine.edu.
Recommended Citation
Kiffney, Grace, "A Comparison of the Experiences of Economic Adaptation and Integration for Refugees and Asylum Seekers in
Maine" (2016). Honors College. 394.
https://digitalcommons.library.umaine.edu/honors/394
 
 
 
 
A COMPARISON OF THE EXPERIENCES OF ECONOMIC ADAPTATION AND 
INTEGRATION FOR REFUGEES AND ASYLUM SEEKERS IN MAINE  
by 
Grace Kiffney 
 
 
 
A Thesis Submitted in Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for a Degree with Honors 
(International Affairs, Concentration Anthropology) 
 
 
 
 
 
The Honors College 
 
University of Maine 
 
May 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advisory Committee: 
 Robert W. Glover, Assistant Professor of Honors & Political Science, Advisor  
Kenneth Farber, Senior Counsel, Avangrid, Inc.  
Mazie Hough, Associate Professor of History and Women', Gender, and Sexuality 
     Studies 
Samuel Hanes, Assistant Professor of Anthropology 
 Ann Acheson, Research Associate, Margaret Chase Smith Policy Center; Faculty 
     Associate, Anthropology 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The migration of refugees and asylum seekers affects them and the communities 
where they resettle, as people from different backgrounds and cultures come together. In 
the United States, the federally funded refugee resettlement program supports refugees 
with welfare benefits, case management, and other services to assist with integration. 
However, no such federal program exists for asylum seekers, who are considered 
displaced people, but who have not received immigration status as refugees. This project 
sought to answer the question: How is the experience of supporting oneself different and 
similar for refugees and asylum seekers, in the context of Maine? 
Research involved a literature review on the use of social capital within 
immigrant groups, an analysis of recent local newspaper articles on the migration of 
asylum seekers to Maine, and eleven semi-structured key informant interviews with 
asylees, refugees, community leaders, and service providers. It appeared that their 
communities were an important source of information, temporary housing, and served as 
a forum from which to celebrate culture, for both refugees and asylum seekers, though 
perhaps more so for asylum seekers. Many refugees and asylum seekers shared the 
challenges of integrating into a new culture and seeking better opportunities after their 
credentials were devalued. This study proposes that NGOs develop mentoring programs 
for asylum seekers modeled on the mentoring programs organized by Catholic Charities 
Maine Refugee and Immigration Services. These would build bridges of understanding 
between refugees and members of the receiving community. 
 
 
iii 
 
Acknowledgements and Dedication 
First and foremost, I owe a huge thank-you to my thesis advisor, Professor Rob 
Glover, for sharing his expertise in helping me design this project, and for his constant 
support and encouragement when I felt lost in the process. I would also like to thank all 
the members of my committee, Ken Farber, and Professors Mazie Hough, Ann Acheson, 
and Sam Hanes for their feedback on my project and their help designing it, as well as 
their help putting me in touch with contacts for this project. I would like to thank 
everyone who shared their valuable time and insights through allowing me to interview 
them. I am grateful to Rendle and Patricia Jones for the generous fellowship that helped 
me undertake this research. Finally, I would like to thank my family for helping me get to 
this stage, and my friends and fellow honors students for commiserating with me 
throughout this process. 
This thesis is dedicated to all newcomers to the state of Maine, and everyone who 
is working to make the state a more welcoming place. 
  
 
 
iv 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Abstract……………………………………………………………………………………ii 
Dedication/Acknowledgements…………………………………………………………..iii 
Introduction………………………………………………………………………………..1 
     Methodology…………………………………………………………………………...5 
Chapter 1 Background: The Changing International Refugee and Asylum Crisis and its  
 Implications for the United States………………………………………………………...9 
     History and Challenges of Refugee Resettlement in the U.S.………………………..12 
     History and Challenges of Asylum Policy in the U.S………………………………...16 
     Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………20 
Chapter 2 Refugee and Asylum Seeker Resettlement in the Maine Context……………22 
     Refugee and Asylum-Seeker Resettlement in Maine and Access to  
      Public Benefits……………………………………………………………………….24 
     The General Assistance Controversy and its Implications…………………………...27 
     Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………35 
Chapter 3 Social Capital, Sponsorship, and Community Integration……………………37 
     Social capital within immigrant groups………………………………………………38 
     Sponsorship, Integration, and Multiculturalism………………………………………45 
     Social Capital and Integration in Portland and Lewiston…………………………….49 
     Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………55 
Chapter 4 Interview Analysis………………………………………………………….....57 
     Asylum Cases and Work Authorization: Challenges Faced by Asylum Seekers…….57 
     The Language Barrier and Devalued Credentials: Challenges Faced by Asylees and   
 
 
v 
 
      Refugees……………………………………………………………………………...60 
     Negotiating a Relationship with the Receiving Community……………………........62 
     The Role of “Immigrant Communities” and Ethnic Community Associations…........66 
     Suggestions for Improving Opportunity and Integration……………………………..73 
     Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………76 
Chapter 5 Conclusion: Moving Forward………………………………………………...78 
References………………………………………………………………………………..85 
Appendix…………………………………………………………………………………90 
Author’s Biography…………………………………………………………………….114 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
When I arrived in Maine I didn’t know anybody. I just came to Maine because I 
heard of some assistance that refugees1 could get from the government and that it was 
really helpful for the newcomers, and they were coming from all over the country. And 
when I heard about Maine from different people, I came here. I really had no one to help 
me out.  
When I arrived at the bus station, I saw a woman was standing two steps away 
from me. She was on the phone and I heard her speaking Kinyarwanda, my language. I 
was really afraid to arrive in a new place because I didn’t know how people behaved, 
how Maine was, I didn’t know about the shelter . . . I didn’t know anything.  
But when I heard her speaking, I felt relieved. So I tried to approach her, and 
asked her some questions, like what part of Rwanda was she from. We talked a bit and 
she accepted me to stay at her place for a while until I found a place to live. Now she is 
like my aunt. I know she is there for me, and I am there for her. We are like family.  
 -Excerpt from an interview with an asylee living in Portland, Maine 
 
Moving can be hard for anyone. But imagine you are uprooted from your home 
by the threat of persecution or violence and must flee to another country in order to be 
safe. Perhaps you needed to leave so quickly you had to leave your family behind. When 
you arrive, you may not know the language, you do not know where you will live, you do 
not know anyone who will tell you where the grocery store is, let alone comfort you and 
assist you through the period of adjustment. This is the reality confronting many refugees 
                                                
1 The interviewee may have been implying asylum seekers. 
 
 
2 
 
and asylum seekers around the world, including the asylee from Rwanda speaking above. 
However, as the story above illustrates, members of the community where refugees and 
asylum seekers resettle, if they extend their help, can make all the difference for a 
newcomer.  
The terms “refugee” and “asylum seeker” are often confused or misunderstood, 
even though these distinct immigration status categories entail different benefits, 
opportunities, and experiences for refugees and asylum seekers once they reach the 
United States. Whereas refugees are assigned their immigration status before they are 
resettled and it is never in question, asylum seekers apply for asylee status—which 
equates to refugee status—once they arrive in the country where they hope to resettle. 
The law prevents asylum seekers from working for months while they await a decision to 
be made on their ability to remain in the United States. Their whole future is in doubt. 
While the United States has a fairly comprehensive refugee resettlement program, 
with temporary financial assistance, case management, and employment services, asylum 
seekers cannot access any of these federally funded programs or benefits until they 
receive asylum. Lack of access to these benefits, programs, and the ability to work, can 
undermine the process of integration for asylum seekers and their economic security. 
Considering these factors, this study will attempt to answer the question: How is the 
experience of supporting oneself and integrating different and similar for refugees and 
asylum seekers in Maine? This study will focus on Maine because a significant number 
of asylum seekers have migrated to Maine over the past decade and a half. Though 
several thousand refugees have been resettled through the federal refugee resettlement 
program over the past thirty years, there is often a disconnect between the federal refugee 
 
 
3 
 
and asylum policy and its implementation at the local level, which has often led to 
frustration among long-term Mainers and among refugees and asylum seekers. 
Additionally, as the least racially or ethnically diverse state, Maine presents an interesting 
backdrop from which to explore the tensions that have arisen between some long-term 
Mainers and new Mainers such as refugees and asylum seekers, who often have distinct 
cultural and ethnic backgrounds than the majority of Maine’s population. Furthermore, 
the state of Maine and its cities provide General Assistance, which is one of few welfare 
programs in the nation that serves asylum seekers, adding to the complexity of the issue.  
However, this study will move beyond analyzing the different welfare benefits 
and opportunities afforded to refugees and asylum seekers in Maine, and compare the 
ways refugees and asylum seekers support themselves using social capital. Social capital 
is often embedded within co-ethnic immigrant communities, and members of these 
communities often utilize social capital in order to “make it,” due to the challenging 
conditions presented by their new home: the language barrier, devalued credentials, few 
belongings and little wealth, and possible discrimination from the receiving community. 
Social capital is defined as the “feature of social life—networks, norms, and trust—that 
enable participants to work together more effectively to pursue shared objectives” 
(Putnam, 1995: 665).  
This study will explore how refugees and asylum seekers use social “bonds” and 
“bridges” to adapt to life in Maine and improve their opportunities. While “bonding” 
refers to the ties of trust that become established within an immigrant group, “bridging” 
refers to the ties built between immigrant groups and the receiving community or other 
immigrant groups (Allen, 2007: 91). These ties can result in social safety nets for 
 
 
4 
 
newcomers, or may lead to cross-cultural understandings. Cross-cultural understandings 
may make the host community members more welcoming and tolerant as they learn from 
the newcomers about their cultures. They may also ease the process of integration, as 
newcomers learn about the cultural norms and day-to-day aspects of life in their new 
home from members of the receiving community. If social bridges improve the process of 
integration, they may result in better economic opportunities for newcomers.  
There is some research on refugees’ use of social capital, but there is far less 
research on asylum seekers’ use of social capital to survive, let alone succeed in their new 
circumstances. This is significant, because in the United States, asylum seekers are 
afforded a much smaller safety net than refugees, perhaps leading asylum seekers to rely 
more on their communities for help than refugees. This informal asylum seeker 
community support is essential, but cannot take the place of programs and policies, such 
as those that serve refugees, in assisting asylum seekers with the process of integration. 
Because U.S. immigration policy has not been significantly reformed for decades, it may 
not be likely that U.S. asylum policy will be modernized soon. Thus, integration policies 
for refugees and asylum seekers will likely have to be made at the state or local levels. 
Local level programs that serve refugees, such as those run by Catholic Charities Maine 
Refugee and Immigration Services, though they receive significant federal funding, may 
be able to serve as models for integration programs for asylum seekers in Maine and 
elsewhere. 
 The first chapter of this thesis will briefly chronicle the history of the international 
refugee system, and the history of the refugee and asylum systems in the United States. It 
will explore some of the issues within the U.S. asylum system, both for asylum seekers 
 
 
5 
 
and the communities where they resettle. It will also compare the issues facing the US 
asylum system with the US refugee program, which has not been significantly 
modernized since the 1980s, when it was established, and which faces its own challenges. 
The second chapter will focus on the Maine case of refugee and asylum seeker 
resettlement, concentrating on the last fifteen years. It will provide a brief history of the 
main refugee and asylum seeker migrations to Maine from the Middle East and Africa, 
and how the receiving community has responded over time to these migrations. 
Specifically it will discuss the General Assistance controversy and the immigrant rights 
advocacy that the controversy sparked, and the rhetoric that both sides of the debate used 
to support their cause. The third chapter will analyze the use of social capital within 
immigrant communities, and reference previous studies on how refugee communities in 
Maine have used social capital. This analysis will provide a framework for understanding 
how asylum seekers may use their social networks to support themselves in comparison 
with refugees. Chapter four will attempt to answer the research question above by 
analyzing the insights that asylees, refugees, community leaders, and service providers 
offered through interviews. Finally, chapter five will review the main ideas from the 
study and offer suggestions for moving forward.  
 
Methodology 
 
The research methods for this project were a literature review, an analysis of local 
news media, and a series of eleven semi-structured key informant interviews with 
asylees, refugees, service providers, and community leaders. The literature review 
 
 
6 
 
included the history of the U.S. refugee program, and the use of social capital within 
immigrant groups, especially refugee groups in Portland. The news media analysis 
provided information about the migration of asylum seekers to Maine and chronicled the 
controversy over whether or not asylum seekers should be eligible to receive General 
Assistance.  
The key informant interviews, held with members of the community who are 
leaders or are very knowledgeable about their community members’ experiences, yielded 
qualitative information. Because Portland is home to asylees and refugees from diverse 
backgrounds and many countries of origin, I did not impose any limitations based on 
country of origin, or year of arrival in the United States, in attempting to contact and 
interview people. A comparison of the experiences of immigrants based on immigration 
status, refugee or asylee, would need to encompass people from all backgrounds. Thus, I 
attempted to interview people from many different countries and backgrounds. 
To recruit participants, I began by contacting the Immigrant Legal Advocacy 
Project and the Maine People’s Alliance, and used snowball sampling from there to reach 
potential interviewees. Because of the nature of snowball sampling, it can produce 
sample bias. Indeed, the refugees and asylees I interviewed came from four main 
countries: Burundi, Rwanda, Iraq, and Iran. However, many of the interviewees also 
made a concerted effort in trying to connect me with people from diverse backgrounds.  
In the end, I interviewed five asylees (two from Burundi and three from Rwanda), 
three refugees (two from Iran and one from Iraq), and an additional three community 
leaders and service providers from the receiving community. Many refugees and asylees 
interviewed for this study were also active in advocacy or service provision organizations 
 
 
7 
 
as well. Some of these interviews were conducted in person and some over the phone. In-
person interviews were recorded and transcribed, and I took notes on the phone 
conversations. These interviews lasted thirty minutes to an hour. I asked asylees and 
refugees to recount their experiences getting themselves established since arriving in 
Maine, and asked questions about the role or importance of community, the various 
forms of economic support they had received, their opinions on the response of the 
receiving community to their arrival, how they thought the experiences of refugees and 
asylees differed, and their ideas or plans for improving opportunity for refugees and 
asylees. I asked the members of service provision and community organizations about 
their experiences working with asylees and refugees, and their opinions on what the 
community, city, and state does well in assisting refugees and asylees, and ideas for how 
to improve opportunity for newcomers. 
To minimize risk, I sought approval for this project through the University of 
Maine Institutional Review Board. Participants signed consent forms that explained the 
research project and addressed issues of confidentiality. Asylum seeker and refugee 
participants will remain confidential in this report; however, if they were involved in 
advocacy or played a leadership role within their community they had the option to have 
their opinions and statements attributed to them. Service providers also had the option to 
have opinions and statements attributed to them. 
Because the scope of this project was limited, I do not propose that the individuals 
interviewed for the project represent all the ideas and opinions of their communities or 
organizations as a whole. There is the possibility that interviewer bias has affected the 
way the information shared in the interviews was interpreted in this thesis. However, this 
 
 
8 
 
study was able to provide a number of insights that are shared among many members of 
asylee and refugee communities.  
The first three chapters include the literature review and local news media 
analysis while the fourth and fifth also include analysis from the interviews. My analysis 
of the interviews involved reviewing the insights shared and identifying common themes 
and contrasts as well as my own perceptions. This project presents a sample of the main 
differences and similarities in the experiences refugees and asylum seekers face and a 
narrative of these experiences within the current context of the immigration debate in 
Maine. 
 
  
 
 
9 
 
CHAPTER 1 
BACKGROUND: THE CHANGING INTERNATIONAL REFUGEE AND ASYLUM 
CRISIS AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR THE UNITED STATES 
 
The current international refugee system, initiated at the close of the Second 
World War with the UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951, cannot 
adequately address the worldwide refugee and asylum seeker crisis. This system, created 
to avoid another catastrophe like that which befell victims of the Holocaust who were 
denied asylum, has endured and adapted to the changing world order of the past 70 years. 
Its original goal was to aid European refugees from World War II; later it was intended to 
protect European refugees of the Cold War, then it was extended to protect refugees from 
all over the world fleeing international and internal state conflicts. However, with the 
current record number of refugees, asylum seekers, and internally displaced persons in 
the world—59.5 million—the international refugee and asylum system struggles to assist 
so many people (UNHCR Global Trends, 2014: 2).  
Refugees have a specific legal status that allows them to immigrate to a safe 
country and receive certain benefits. The formal UN Refugee Convention definition of a 
refugee is someone who is “unwilling or unable to return to their home country because 
of past persecution or a ‘well-founded’ fear of persecution on account of race, religion, 
nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion” (Bohmer & 
Shuman, 2008: 17). Official designation as a refugee is a lengthy process that requires 
interviews with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) staff, 
and often additional screening interviews with government officials of the resettlement 
 
 
10 
 
country. It often takes many years for a decision to be reached about the refugee’s status 
and a resettlement site assigned (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 24-25). Many refugees are 
processed and given refugee status at camps. However, many people who fall under the 
definition of refugee face an imminent threat to their life or wellbeing, and do not have 
the time to undergo this lengthy status determination. Additionally, there may be no 
structured system in their country, such as a UNHCR refugee camp, to allow them to 
apply for this status (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 95). Thus, these people flee persecution 
and claim asylum after arriving in a safe country.  
Asylees are defined by the same criteria as refugees according to the UN Refugee 
Convention; however, their status is determined after they reach the country where they 
hope to resettle (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 24). Until a decision is made about their 
immigration status, they remain asylum seekers, a tenuous legal status that does not 
permit them to access the same support services as refugees in some countries, such as 
the US. According to the UNHCR Global Trends report of 2014, in that year, of all the 
forcibly displaced, 19.5 million were classified as refugees and 1.8 million as asylum 
seekers. In 2014 more people were forcibly displaced than any year in recorded history, 
and it was the largest annual increase in displaced persons (UNHCR Global Trends, 
2014: 2). 2015 saw the same trends continue, with a global spotlight on the Syrian 
asylum seeker crisis. That year, 86 percent of refugees and asylum seekers were settled in 
developing countries and 25 percent were settled in the Least Developed Countries 
(UNHCR Global Trends, 2014: 2). 
The record number of displaced persons around the world underscores a number 
of issues with the international refugee system, including individual states’ exacerbation 
 
 
11 
 
of conflicts that produce displaced people, reluctance to resettle refugees, and a vague 
definition of “refugee” that does not account for all the situations that cause people to flee 
their homeland. More than a third of the world’s refugees live “in a protracted state of 
displacement,” with no immediate resettlement option or the ability to return home (Eby, 
Iverson, & Kekic, 2011: 588). It was not always this way. Before open migration policies 
were ended in the 19th century, people could move relatively freely across borders. But 
when states became more concerned with national security, they instituted a number of 
blatantly racist border controls, such as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and other 
national quota laws (Barkdull, 2012: 108). The increased regulation of national borders 
made it harder for people to immigrate, precipitating the asylum crisis (Loescher et al., 
1992: 13).  
Also, throughout the last half-century, foreign intervention and the proliferation of 
the global arms trade have produced conditions that led to many refugee movements 
(Loescher et al., 1992: 11). But many states are unwilling to change their refugee-
producing foreign policy. The definition of “refugee” is also problematically vague: what 
constitutes “persecution” on account of race, religion, nationality, political opinion, or 
membership in a social group is difficult to define (Loescher et al., 1992: 21). This causes 
challenges for immigration officials in deciding whether someone qualifies as a refugee, 
leading to a host of legal questions and resulting in denial of asylum to some people 
fleeing danger in their homeland. However, despite its flaws, the existence of an 
international refugee and asylum system has at least provided a framework to protect the 
world’s most vulnerable people (Loescher et al., 1992: 13). The flaws within the 
 
 
12 
 
international refugee and asylum system introduce issues in the US’s refugee and asylum 
system.  
 
History and Challenges of Refugee Resettlement in the United States 
 
U.S. refugee policy began with the 1952 Immigration and Nationality Act, based 
on the 1951 UN Refugee Convention, and was modified to its current practice with the 
1980 Refugee Act (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 16). Refugee resettlement in the US 
requires the cooperation of the supranational UNHCR, various departments within the US 
government, and the work of voluntary agencies known as VOLAGS. The US 
government designates VOLAGS with the project of resettlement—establishing contacts 
within the communities where the refugees will be resettled and assisting with the 
process of integration. The US refugee program has evolved through the years to become 
more inclusive and fair; however, current refugee policy faces a number of structural 
challenges. Still based on Cold War ideology, the US refugee program has become 
outdated. Widespread public misperceptions of refugees often undermine the fairness of 
refugee policy. Finally, the US refugee program struggles with a lack of funding, 
sometimes placing strain on local communities where refugees are resettled. 
After decades of ad hoc refugee admissions under the 1952 Immigration and 
Nationality Act, internal pressure for a cohesive and inclusive refugee policy led to the 
creation of the 1980 Refugee Act. In the Refugee Act of 1980, the US adopted the 
international definition of a refugee, and created a formal process for receiving refugees 
and granting asylum (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 18). It also established the Federal 
 
 
13 
 
Refugee Resettlement Program (Barkdull, 2012: 109). A Coordinator of Refugee Affairs 
and the Interagency Coordinating Committee were created; the Office of Refugee Affairs 
grew out of cooperation between the US Dept. of State and what is now the Dept. of 
Health and Human Services (Loescher et al., 1992: 61).  
Funding for the Refugee Resettlement Program is allocated by the State 
Department’s Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration. This funding supports 
VOLAGS which are contracted by the government to resettle refugees (Barkdull, 2012: 
113). VOLAGS are diverse organizations, some faith-based, such as the Hebrew 
Immigrant Aid Society or Catholic Charities Refugee and Immigration Services, and 
some secular, such as the International Rescue Committee. VOLAGS are responsible for 
picking refugees up from the airport, administering the Reception and Placement Grant (a 
one-time grant to assist with initial resettlement costs such as a housing security deposit), 
providing case-management, and any other programming to ease the transition to life in 
the US and the process of integration (Eby, Iverson, & Kekic, 2011: 591-2). The US 
refugee resettlement program is fairly comprehensive; however, it has not been 
significantly updated since the 1980 Act, which creates challenges for the program. 
The US’s out-of-date refugee policy still struggles to overcome its Cold War 
ideological origins (Barkdull, 201: 114). During the Cold War, US refugee policy was 
influenced by the country’s desire to appear morally superior to its rival, the USSR. Thus 
refugees from that part of the world were privileged for resettlement in the US (Loescher 
et al., 1992: 63). Though the US abandoned its previous definition of a refugee as 
someone from a “Communist, Communist-dominated, or Middle Eastern country” 
(Loescher et al., 1992: 60), even today refugees privileged for resettlement in the US are 
 
 
14 
 
from the former USSR and Cuba, as well as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, 
Iran, Bhutan, and Burma (American Immigration Council, 2015). Until the 1980s, the 
majority of refugees entering the US came from the Eastern European communist bloc 
(Barkdull, 2012: 114). Now refugees mainly originate from developing countries. In 
2015, the US accepted 70,000 refugees for resettlement, one third of whom originated 
from the Middle East and South Asia, another third of whom originated from Africa, and 
one quarter from East Asia (American Immigration Council, 2015). These new refugees, 
with distinctly different ethnic backgrounds and religions from the majority of the U.S. 
population, may be seen as a threat to the American “way of life” (Loescher et al., 1992: 
2).  
Indeed, the fairness of US refugee policy is often undermined by 
misrepresentation and misperception of refugees and asylum seekers as economic 
migrants or even terrorists. “Economic migrant” is not a specific legal category like 
“refugee” or “asylee;” instead it refers to the spectrum of immigrants who migrate to 
improve their economic prospects. Economic migrants have various immigration 
statuses, and some may have temporary work visas or may be undocumented. Though 
refugees may also face economic hardship in their home countries, those migrating solely 
for economic reasons are not eligible for refugee or asylee status. The terrorist attacks of 
9/11 brought national security to the forefront of national concerns, which resulted in the 
tightening of immigration policy and restrictions on allowing refugees to resettle 
(Barkdull, 2012: 109). The Real ID Act of 2005 and the PATRIOT Act of 2001 imposed 
restrictions on immigration with the goal of improving safety, though outcomes were 
negligible and refugees were negatively affected. Some legislators and citizens are 
 
 
15 
 
increasingly suspicious of refugees as terrorists resulting in the now more widespread use 
of detention of asylum-seekers (Barkdull, 2012: 111). Despite the fact that of the 784,000 
refugees resettled in the US since 9/11, only three have since been arrested for plotting 
terrorist activities (two were plotting attacks not on the US, and the third’s plot was 
“barely credible”) (Newland, 2015). Misrepresentation is an example of the systemic 
challenges facing the refugee and asylum system.   
Another challenge facing the US’s refugee program is a chronic lack of funding 
which affects the localities where refugees are resettled. Despite being a federal program, 
the US refugee program only provides VOLAGS 39 percent of the funding they need to 
carry out reception and placement services (Barkdull, 2012: 114). VOLAGS thus often 
rely in part on the financial support of the receiving community. Local social service 
providers, already limited by tight budgets, must absorb refugees into their clientele. In 
small urban centers that do not have a history of resettling refugees, the financial 
limitations of the refugee program can overlap with racial prejudices to produce tensions 
within receiving communities.  
While refugees were once almost exclusively resettled in large cities—New York, 
Chicago, and LA—they are now increasingly resettled in smaller urban centers that may 
not have the social service infrastructure and resources to serve them. Small 
municipalities often receive little notice of when a large influx of refugees will be 
resettled (Barkdull, 2012: 114). When some small municipalities struggle to provide 
services to long-term residents, refugee resettlement can cause tensions between long-
term residents and service providers and newcomers (Barkdull, 2012: 115). For example, 
Barkdull describes a small community in Illinois where a large number of refugees were 
 
 
16 
 
resettled one year. Schools had rapidly growing enrollment, but lacked the ability to hire 
more teachers. ESL budgets were limited and struggled to serve the influx of refugee 
children. As a result, some local parents were concerned that the schools appeared to be 
“failing” according to the standards set by No Child Left Behind—which would have 
affected the schools’ reputations—because of the influx of ESL students (Barkdull, 
2012:113). An unfortunate consequence of the lack of coordination between the federal 
refugee program and the local VOLAG resulted in the host community lashing out 
against the refugees, improving the situation for no one.  
While the US’s refugee program has adapted to some degree to the changing 
times and has become more inclusive and comprehensive, there has been no significant 
modernization of refugee policy since the 1980 Refugee Act. Thus, US refugee policy 
faces a number of challenges, especially a lack of funding, which affects both refugees 
and the communities which receive them. The issues facing US refugee policy are 
mirrored in US asylum policy, which developed alongside it, and many challenges that 
refugees and their receiving communities face are also faced by asylum seekers and the 
communities where they resettle. 
 
History and Challenges of Asylum Policy in the United States 
 
The international refugee system, which grew out of the World Wars, struggles to 
cope with the number of people around the world seeking refuge from today’s conflicts. 
The norm of asylum is one way that the nations of the world attempt to account for the 
people who slip through the cracks, who cannot be assisted through the international 
 
 
17 
 
refugee system. While the norm of asylum has long existed in many nations, in the 
United States a formal process for seeking asylum was established in the 1980 Refugee 
Act. There are many issues with the U.S. asylum system, including a large backlog of 
asylum cases in immigration offices and courts and the use of deterrence measures such 
as detention. Deterrence measures are intended to dissuade asylum seekers from entering 
the country, but result in a high emotional toll for asylum seekers and a high financial toll 
for society. Though slight reforms were introduced to the system in 1991 to improve the 
asylum system’s functioning, there are still flaws. While the international asylum system 
fulfills an essential worldwide political function and is morally necessary, the problems 
with the U.S.’s asylum system affect asylum seekers and the communities where they 
settle. 
It was not until the passage of the 1980 Refugee Act that those already in the 
United States and fitting the definition of refugee could apply for asylum (Bohmer & 
Shuman, 2008: 19). Asylum seekers, unlike refugees, pay for their passage to the United 
States up-front, and obtain their own visas. Asylum seekers, who flee persecution like 
refugees, enter the United States on various visas, such as business, tourist, or student 
visas, or are undocumented. Sometimes asylum seekers enter the country with forged or 
fraudulent documents, because they would be apprehended by authorities in their 
countries if they traveled with their own documents, or because they would not be able to 
obtain documents if U.S. consular officials thought they were moving to the United 
States (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 95). Immigration officials in the United States often 
discount asylum seekers’ cases if they arrived in the United States with forged or 
 
 
18 
 
fraudulent documents, even though this is acceptable under international law when the 
cases are deemed credible (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 251).  
Asylum in the United States is obtained in three ways: “affirmatively,” 
“defensively,” or derived as the child or spouse of an asylee (Martin & Yankay, 2014). 
To obtain asylum affirmatively, the asylum seeker submits an application and is 
interviewed by an asylum officer. If the application is denied during the hearing, the 
applicant is placed in removal proceedings by the United States Citizenship and 
Immigration Services, where an immigration judge will hear the case. This is considered 
a defensive asylum application. Asylum may be obtained defensively without the 
applicant originally appearing for a hearing with an asylum officer, for instance, when 
one is placed in removal proceedings for being undocumented. (However, even if an 
asylum applicant is undocumented or has fraudulent documentation, as soon as an asylum 
application is filed, that person has legal immigration status.) In 2013, 15,266 people 
obtained asylum affirmatively, and 9,933 people obtained asylum defensively (Martin & 
Yankay, 2014). One challenge facing the fair adjudication of asylum cases is the backlog 
of cases in the United States’ immigration courts.  
The origins of the immigration court backlog can be traced to the beginning of the 
asylum system in the 1980s, when tens of thousands of Central Americans fleeing civil 
war entered the United States and applied for asylum (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 19). 
Though reforms to the asylum system were introduced, they have done little to diminish 
the backlog. When the Central American asylum seekers made their cases, the majority 
were denied. But, in 1990, a class action lawsuit declared that it was unfair to deny the 
claims of these asylum seekers. These asylum seekers were able to redo their asylum 
 
 
19 
 
hearings, further burdening immigration officials with an additional 250,000 cases 
(Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 20). Reforms to the asylum system introduced in 1991 
removed the adjudication of asylum claims from the enforcement section of Immigration 
and Naturalization Services, and created a separate agency with its own specially trained 
staff to hear cases (Loescher et al., 1992: 5). However, the Immigration and 
Naturalization officers continue to be overwhelmed by the number of asylum cases each 
year. Indeed, the backlog of cases reached 449,569 in May of 2015 (Osuna, 2015).   
Though the United States recognizes the need for an asylum system, many facets 
of U.S. asylum policy are designed to deter people from seeking asylum in the United 
States, due to a generalized suspicion of immigrants as freeloaders or a security threat. 
For example, the 1996 Immigration Control and Fiscal Responsibility Act, based on the 
fear that asylum seekers are economic migrants seeking a route to permanent residence, 
installed more measures of deterrence in asylum policy (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 37). 
One deterrence measure was the delayed issuing of work authorizations to asylum 
applicants—if asylum seekers could not support themselves, maybe they would not come 
(Miller, 2014). Asylum seekers must now wait five months to receive a work 
authorization after submitting their asylum applications. Another deterrence measure that 
is increasingly used is detention. The 1996 immigration reform law requires that asylum 
seekers submitting applications at ports of entry to the United States be detained through 
the first steps of their application process. If deterrence of asylum seekers is employed 
because of their supposed financial cost and security threat, it is odd that detention—a 
costly process—is used to control them, especially since 90 percent of those referred to 
court appear to have their cases heard (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 74). Additionally, after 
 
 
20 
 
9/11, legislation was passed to crack down on undocumented immigrants to improve 
security. As mentioned earlier, many asylum seekers arrive with false documentation, and 
this is often held against them when they make their cases, making it less likely that even 
credible asylum seekers will have their cases approved (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 21).  
The U.S. asylum system serves a valuable and essential function by offering 
protection to those people who cannot be protected through the country’s formal refugee 
admissions program. However, the system is antiquated and struggles to function, 
highlighted by the immigration court backlogs. Sometimes it appears the real goal of the 
asylum policy is to deter more asylum seekers from arriving than from offering asylum to 
credible asylum seekers (Barkdull, 2012: 111). Detaining asylum seekers is expensive 
and costs taxpayers; detention may also entail a high emotional cost for asylum seekers 
who have just escaped from traumatic experiences in their home countries, and can 
hamper the process of adjustment to life in the United States. 
 
Conclusion 
 
The international refugee and asylum system, as well as its implementation in the 
United States, is antiquated, politicized, and struggles to cope with the scale of the global 
problem of displaced persons. The international refugee and asylum system was 
established in the post-World War II world, and shaped by the dynamics of the Cold War. 
U.S. refugee and asylum policy has not been substantially modernized since this period, 
and still reflects antiquated foreign policy goals. While states recognize a moral 
obligation to receive refugees and asylees, their governments and citizens also perceive 
 
 
21 
 
accepting refugees and asylees as a financial and social burden, which is sometimes 
compounded by nativism and fear. Thus, while governments have institutionalized 
refugee and asylum policies, there are also mechanisms within these policies intended to 
deter asylum seekers from immigrating. However, international refugee and asylum 
policy plays a vital role in international security because large numbers of internally 
displaced people can destabilize a country (Bohmer & Shuman, 2008: 251). A well-
functioning and updated refugee and asylum policy in the United States will be fairer to 
these newcomers and the communities where they resettle.  
 
 
  
 
 
22 
 
CHAPTER 2 
REFUGEE AND ASYLUM SEEKER RESETTLEMENT IN THE MAINE CONTEXT 
 
Maine, hardly isolated from the global migration of displaced people, has faced its 
own struggles associated with the arrival and resettlement of refugees and asylum 
seekers. The vast global migration of displaced people has concrete repercussions in the 
communities where the displaced people resettle. History has shown us that when large 
waves of immigrants arrive in a host community, a reaction, at times hostile, is sparked in 
the host community. This is true for Maine. Immigrants from many different countries 
have resettled in Maine; however, in the last twenty to thirty years large numbers of 
people fleeing conflicts in Africa and the Middle East have begun arriving, reshaping the 
state’s demographics. Many long-time Mainers have responded positively to the growing 
diversity in the state, welcoming newcomers for increasing the state’s workforce and for 
initiating a project of cross-cultural understanding.  
However, there have also been negative reactions to the growing refugee and 
asylum seeker population in Maine, founded on fears of these newcomers using up local 
resources or changing the “Maine/American culture.” A noteworthy example is the 
tensions between some long-term Lewiston residents, voiced by two Lewiston mayors, 
and the many Somali refugees who migrated to Lewiston over the past decade and a half. 
The first flashpoint in Lewiston was former Mayor Laurier Raymond’s open letter in 
2002 to Somali community leaders asking them to discourage more Somali migration to 
the city because it was putting pressure on the city’s social services and schools 
(Langellier, 2006: 97). However, this negative sentiment directed at the Somali 
 
 
23 
 
community generated a far greater outpouring of support in Lewiston and across the state 
in support of the newcomers, culminating in the hugely successful Many and One rally.2 
However, tensions in Lewiston have continued, voiced in the inflammatory statements of 
the current mayor, Robert Macdonald. Mayor Macdonald has gained international 
attention for his controversial remarks which seemed to many to be directed at Somali 
refugees, particularly his exhortation to immigrants on a BBC interview in 2012: “You 
come here, you come and you accept our culture and you leave your culture at the door” 
(Lippman, 2012). In Lewiston’s 2015 mayoral elections, Ben Chin, a liberal graduate of 
Bates College who ran on a platform of social change and attempted to counter Mayor 
Macdonald’s rhetoric, was ultimately defeated by the incumbent (Russell, 2015). 
Lewiston, and Maine, are still rife with immigrant-nativist tensions.  
The General Assistance controversy of 2014-2015 is another example of these 
tensions and the ripple effect that they can cause. In a state-wide decision that mainly 
affected the city of Portland, Governor LePage channeled anti-immigrant sentiment in the 
state to attempt to cut General Assistance for some noncitizens, mainly Central African 
asylum seekers. This move developed into a year-long controversy that inspired activism 
within the asylum-seeker/asylee and other immigrant communities, generated wide 
support for this group throughout the state, and ended in legislation that guaranteed 
continued state support for asylum seekers.  
This chapter will briefly chronicle the significant refugee and asylum-seeker 
migrations to Maine. It will also review how differences in immigration status—refugee 
                                                
2 The Many and One rally of 2003 was held to counter an anti-Somali rally held by white supremacist 
group World Church of the Creator. While around 40 people attended the World Church of the Creator 
rally, perhaps as many 5,000 people attended the Many and One rally, overflowing the capacity of the 
gymnasium where it was held (Groening, 2003). 
 
 
24 
 
versus asylum-seeker—affect what public benefits refugees and asylum-seekers can 
access. Finally, it will recount the General Assistance dilemma in Maine: how rhetoric is 
used by pro- and anti-immigration advocates in Maine to garner support for their causes, 
and how this dilemma highlights a need at the state and local level for policy to address 
the integration of newcomers here.  
 
Refugee and Asylum-Seeker Resettlement in Maine and Access to Public Benefits 
 
Over the past two to three decades, Maine has hosted the resettlement of several 
waves of African and Middle Eastern refugees and asylum seekers, noticeably impacting 
the communities of Portland and Lewiston. In the 1990s, refugees from Somalia began 
arriving in Maine. While some Somali refugees are directly resettled in Maine through 
Catholic Charities Refugee and Immigration Services (CCMRIS), the majority arrived in 
Maine as secondary migrants, leaving their original resettlement sites in other states 
(Langellier, 2006: 98). In fact, about 75 percent of new Mainers, that is, immigrants 
resettling in Maine, are secondary migrants (CCMRIS, n.d.). There are no precise data on 
numbers of secondary migrants or asylum seekers from each country; however members 
of these communities and service providers provide rough estimates. Today about 5,000 
Somalis live in Portland (Bell, 2012); many more also reside in Lewiston. Sudanese 
refugees arrived in the next wave. There are about 4,000 Sudanese in Maine, the majority 
of whom arrived in the United States as refugees (MIRC, 2015). Many of these refugees 
waited years in refugee camps to be resettled in the United States. In 2015, the largest 
group of resettled primary refugees, or those whose initial resettlement location was 
 
 
25 
 
Maine, was from Iraq. CCMRIS resettled 442 primary refugees from six countries: Iraq 
(215), Somalia (192), Congo (20), Afghanistan (11), Eritrea (3), and Iran (1) (CCMRIS, 
n.d.).  
However, today, Central African asylum seekers are the fastest-growing 
immigrant group in Portland. About 90 percent of asylum seekers resettling in Portland 
come from four countries: Angola, Congo, Rwanda, and Burundi (Miller, 2014). Though 
asylum seekers from Central Africa began arriving as early as 2000, their numbers have 
greatly increased since 2010. City officials and community leaders estimate that the 
population of Central African asylum seekers in and around Portland is approximately 
1,000 (Bell, 2012).  
The migration of asylum seekers is a trend on the rise. In the Northeast, asylum 
cases nearly doubled between 2010 and 2013. In Maine in 2014, there were 587 asylum 
applicants still waiting for their cases to be heard by asylum officials. In 2013, Maine’s 
Immigration and Naturalization Services staff conducted between 30 and 40 interviews, 
less than 10 percent of the cases filed (Miller, 2014). Once asylum seekers’ cases are 
approved, they gain refugee status and are eligible for some services offered by Catholic 
Charities. 
 The key difference between asylum seekers and refugees is immigration status; 
their immigration status allows refugees to receive federal welfare benefits and pursue 
employment immediately, while asylum seekers can do neither. In Maine, Catholic 
Charities Refugee and Immigration Services is the only designated refugee resettlement 
organization through the federal refugee resettlement private-public partnership program. 
All refugees are allocated a Reception and Placement grant of $1,875 upon arrival in the 
 
 
26 
 
United States, to be spent on resettlement costs such as a security deposit for housing, 
winter clothes, food, etc. ($1,125 goes directly to the refugee while $750 is intended for 
service provision and administration) (Eby, Iverson, & Kekic, 2011: 591-2; Nezer, 2014: 
136).  
Refugees also may receive Refugee Cash Assistance and MaineCare for eight 
months after their arrival: a single person receives $230 per month and a family of four 
receives $611. Refugees’ access to MaineCare is funded by the Refugee Medical 
Assistance grant awarded to states by the federal government. After the first eight 
months, only those refugees eligible for the federally-funded Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families (TANF) program, which provides a small amount of financial assistance 
to extremely low-income families, may continue to receive MaineCare. Refugees may 
continue to use other federally funded assistance for up to five years after arrival 
(Refugees and Access to Funds & Benefits in the U.S., CCMRIS). This five-year limit on 
access to TANF benefits for refugees mirrors the five-year limit for U.S. citizens and is 
linked to the 1996 welfare reform law, discussed below (Singer, 2002). Refugees are also 
eligible for various services offered by Catholic Charities including case management, 
employment services, elder services, mentoring and interpretation services (CCMRIS, 
n.d.). Thus, refugees receive some financial assistance and access to other services to 
help them integrate when they arrive in the United States.  
 On the other hand, asylum seekers cannot access the federal benefits available to 
refugees because of their immigration status. However, in some cases asylum seekers 
may be able to access state or local benefits. The United States is one of few developed 
countries that does not offer federal benefits to asylum seekers or allow them work 
 
 
27 
 
authorization for 150 days, putting them in a financial limbo where it is challenging to 
support themselves (Human Rights Watch, 2013). These specifications have their roots in 
the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act, a welfare reform law 
passed the same year as the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility 
Act (Byrne, 2015). In the absence of access to federal benefits, a few states—California, 
Washington, New York, Minnesota and Hawaii—allow immigrants who are ineligible for 
federal benefits, including asylum seekers, to access state and local benefits (Miller, 
2014). Prior to 2014, Maine had provided General Assistance (GA) to asylum seekers. 
General Assistance is intended to serve as a “last resort” form of welfare for any person 
who is experiencing a period of need and may not fit within the guidelines of any other 
welfare program. GA is funded jointly by the state and municipalities, with the state 
reimbursing the municipalities for their expenditures. Funding is generally split 50-50 
between municipalities and the state, but if a municipality spends over a certain 
threshold, the state will begin to reimburse the municipality at a rate of 90 percent to 10 
percent (DHHS, 2015). The fact that asylum seekers in Maine could access General 
Assistance was the rallying point behind the next wave of anti-immigrant sentiment in 
Maine initiated by the governor, Paul LePage.  
 
The General Assistance Controversy and its Implications 
 
 In 2014, the LePage administration declared that municipalities who continued to 
provide General Assistance to immigrants without determinate status, including asylum 
seekers, would not be reimbursed by the state for their expenditures, sparking a 
 
 
28 
 
controversy throughout the state over its obligation, or lack thereof, to support asylum 
seekers (Miller, 2014). The Maine Department of Health and Human Services instituted a 
policy whereby municipal officials were required to ask General Assistance applicants to 
verify their immigration status with supporting documentation (Byrne, 2015). To buttress 
this policy, Governor LePage “pledged to withhold all state reimbursement to any 
municipality that continued offering General Assistance to undocumented immigrants” 
(Moretto, 2014). The Maine attorney general, Janet Mills, criticized the policy and 
questioned its legality and constitutionality (Moretto, 2014). Various cities, including 
Portland, Bangor, and Westbrook, defied the new policy and continued to provide 
General Assistance to asylum seekers. In July of 2014, the cities of Portland and 
Westbrook, supported by the Maine Municipal Association, the American Civil Liberties 
Union of Maine (ACLU), and Maine Equal Justice Partners, filed suit against the LePage 
administration in the Maine Superior Court to block the policy. The LePage 
administration countersued (Miller, 2014). Meanwhile, the ACLU of Maine and Maine 
Equal Justice Partners urged the Maine Legislature to draft a law explicitly allowing 
asylum seekers to receive General Assistance (Byrne, 2015). 
During the summer of 2015, a court decision was reached that was a partial 
victory for the LePage administration. In a somewhat contradictory decision, a 
Cumberland County Superior Court justice ruled that the state may indeed withhold 
General Assistance reimbursements to municipalities for funds spent on asylum seekers. 
However, the justice also ruled that the state may not penalize municipalities for 
providing General Assistance to asylum seekers by withholding all reimbursements 
(Byrne, 2015). The justice additionally found that the Maine DHHS did not follow proper 
 
 
29 
 
rulemaking procedures in its rewriting of General Assistance policy. Finally, the court 
found that the state had overstepped its authority in attempting to enforce federal law. 
The Maine DHHS attempted to enforce the 1996 federal welfare reform law, though it 
only has the power to enforce state welfare policy (Byrne, 2015). It also would have 
required city officials to assume de-facto immigration officer roles by asking General 
Assistance applicants proof of their status. Thus, the justice found, cities offering General 
Assistance to asylum seekers were not complying with federal law; however they did 
comply with state law that did not disqualify General Assistance applicants due to 
immigration status (Byrne, 2015).  
In response to this controversy and following the court decision regarding General 
Assistance, city and state lawmakers took action to address what could have been the end 
to assistance for asylum seekers. While the Maine Legislature was deliberating legislation 
to explicitly allow asylum seekers to receive General Assistance, the Portland City 
Council deliberated having the city fund General Assistance for asylum seekers (Portland 
Press Herald, 2015). One City Council member drafted a budget for the city to fund 
General Assistance for asylum seekers for one year, which would rely in part on surplus 
funds gained from increasing property taxes 3.1 percent (Billings, 2015). After a long 
City Council meeting, where many asylees, asylum seekers, and their supporters testified 
on the need for General Assistance to be available, the council ultimately voted in favor 
of the city funding the program for one year, by a margin of five to four (Billings, 2015). 
This Portland Community Support Fund, as it was called, however, fell $1.5 million short 
of the $4.1 million needed to fund any services beyond housing, and the city asked the 
community to help bridge the gap (Billings, 2015). It is apparent that this was a strained 
 
 
30 
 
and temporary solution to the issue of supporting asylum seekers in Portland without the 
passage of legislation at the state level.   
However, the Maine Legislature passed a law, L.D. 369, or “An Act To Clarify 
the Immigration Status of Noncitizens Eligible for General Assistance,” that allows 
lawfully present immigrants to receive General Assistance for two years (Miller, 2015).3 
Those who have submitted an application for asylum may continue to access General 
Assistance for up to 24 months (Miller, 2015).  
In addition to ensuring one form of economic assistance to asylum seekers in 
tenuous financial situations, the controversy surrounding the General Assistance dilemma 
of the past two years galvanized widespread support for new immigrants in Maine. 
LePage instituted his policy of withholding General Assistance from asylum seekers 
during a Maine gubernatorial election year, while he sought reelection, attempting to rally 
support from his constituents by igniting two emotional topics, immigration and welfare 
reform (Miller, 2014). However, mirroring the anti-immigrant events in Lewiston in 
2002, LePage’s efforts to mobilize anti-immigrant sentiment largely backfired, at least in 
terms of policy.  
There was an outpouring of support for asylum seekers in Portland and across the 
state. Asylees and immigrant rights advocacy organizations such as the Maine Immigrant 
Rights Coalition testified before the Legislature about the need for General Assistance to 
be available to asylum seekers (Nahimana, personal communication, 2015). The Mayor 
of Portland at the time, Michael Brennan, repeatedly voiced his commitment to ensuring 
                                                
3  L.D. 369 became law in what seemed to many of the bill’s supporters a serendipitous act of fate, after 
Governor LePage did not veto the bill within the allotted 10-day window of time. Because the Legislature 
was adjourned at the time, Governor LePage believed that he had more time to veto this bill, along with 65 
others. However, the Maine Supreme Court issued an advisory ruling that rejected Governor LePage’s 
assertion, and he decided not to challenge this ruling and agreed to implement the laws (Mistler, 2015).  
 
 
31 
 
support for asylum seekers. In a bipartisan move, the Maine Legislature, including a 
Republican-controlled Senate, passed L.D. 369 in a 29-5 vote (Mistler, 2015). The 
General Assistance controversy in Maine highlights how a wave of anti-immigrant 
sentiment can mobilize a greater reaction of support. Some claim that if Governor LePage 
had not generated the GA controversy, the Maine Legislature would not have passed L.D. 
369 explicitly allowing asylum seekers to receive General Assistance (Nahimana, 
personal communication, 2016). The controversy also highlights the rhetoric used by 
nativists and immigrant rights advocates.  
In Maine, opponents of providing General Assistance to asylum seekers often 
referred to them as “illegal” immigrants, and sought to portray asylum seekers as drain on 
social services, harming the needs of long-term Maine residents. Governor LePage often 
used the term “illegal” to refer to asylum seekers, as did some of his supporters, including 
Lewiston Mayor MacDonald (Miller, 2014). Many immigrant rights activists take issue 
with the use of this term because most asylum seekers in Maine arrive on valid visas, and 
once they apply for asylum, asylum-pending status is considered legal (Miller, 2014). 
They assert that the use of the term “illegal” is political, meant to provoke distrust of 
immigrants. Maine legislators who opposed General Assistance for asylum seekers also 
asserted that budget limitations necessitated withholding aid from them, many contending 
that supporters of L.D. 369 were more concerned with the welfare of immigrants than 
with Maine’s elderly and disabled (Miller, 2015). This discourse, while specific to 
Maine’s particular situation, is often used by those with a nativist or more conservative 
stance on immigration. 
 
 
32 
 
Immigrant advocates in Maine, including many who supported offering General 
Assistance to asylum seekers, have responded to anti-immigrant rhetoric about the cost of 
supporting immigrants with an argument they hope will resonate with them: the 
economic benefits of immigrants. In Maine, many assert that immigrants bring economic 
vitality to the state. An oft-cited case is the revitalization of Lewiston due to Somali 
migration. In response to the open letter by former Lewiston Mayor Raymond, Somali 
community members pointed out that their presence had brought in federal funding and 
that they had contributed to the workforce in an aging community (Timberlake, 2007: 
23). Additionally, many Somali immigrants cite that their start-up businesses in once-
abandoned buildings bring economic activity to the area and generate property taxes for 
the city (Timberlake, 2007: 169-170). Refugees originally settled in Portland bring in 
about one hundred thousand dollars a year to the city through the Office of Refugee 
Resettlement grants, funding the city shelters and other services which are used by any 
city residents. They also helped to initiate the development of other services such as 
improved bus services (Timberlake, 2007: 170, 172). 
Recently, many pro-immigration advocates have stressed Maine’s need to 
encourage immigration to the state because of an aging population and workforce. James 
Tierney, former Maine attorney general and vocal proponent of encouraging immigration 
to Maine, cites Maine’s aging population as a sign of boding economic troubles. The 
proportion of baby boomers to those under 20 is 39 percent to 18 percent: as baby-
boomers retire, there will be fewer working-age people to fill their positions (Tierney, 
2015). This issue is echoed by economists and the leader of the Portland Regional 
Chamber of Commerce, who cited that employers in the area face a shortage of skilled 
 
 
33 
 
workers to fill positions (Fishell, 2015). Tierney and other immigration advocates link 
diversity to the survival of Maine’s population and economy (Tierney, 2015).  
The General Assistance controversy in Maine is an example of the disjuncture 
between federal immigration and welfare policies and local implementation of those 
policies. This can be seen in the difficulties that are faced by local refugee resettlement 
agencies such as CCMRIS and the towns that resettle newcomers. Sometimes 
municipalities must come up with additional funding and must figure out how to organize 
the resettlement program in their local context (Timberlake, 2007: 7). For example, 
Lewiston lacked adequate financial resources and social service infrastructure and was 
unprepared for the sudden arrival of many Somali secondary migrants, which heightened 
nativist-immigrant tensions within that community. This mirrors Barkdull’s study on the 
small Illinois town that faced tensions after the rapid resettlement of hundreds of 
refugees. However, within the Refugee Resettlement Program, there are other programs 
intended to cope with this disjuncture, such as the Unanticipated Arrivals Program. This 
provides funding for services needed in the time between when refugees arrive and when 
their numbers are counted toward U.S. Census population data used to determine funding 
amounts (Timberl