Alternative Forms of Resilience. A typology of approaches for the study of Citizen Collective Responses in Hard Economic Times

 PACO, ISSN: 2035-6609 - Copyright © 2017 - University of Salento, SIBA: http://siba-ese.unisalento.it 
 
PArtecipazione e COnflitto 
* The Open Journal of Sociopolitical Studies 
http://siba-ese.unisalento.it/index.php/paco   
ISSN: 1972-7623 (print version) 
ISSN: 2035-6609 (electronic version) 
PACO, Issue 10(1) 2017: 136-168 
DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p135 
 
Published in March 15, 2017 
Work licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-Non commercial-Share alike 3.0 
Italian License  
RESEARCH ARTICLE 
 
ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF RESILIENCE 
A typology of approaches for the study of Citizen Collective 
Responses in Hard Economic Times 
 
Maria Kousis 
University of Crete 
 
Maria Paschou 
University of Crete 
 
ABSTRACT: A variety of theoretical and conceptual perspectives have been applied to studying collective 
citizen initiatives arising in response to hard economic times, such as solidarity-based exchanges and 
networks, cooperative structures, barter clubs, credit unions, ethical banks, time banks, alternative social 
currency, citizens’ self-help groups, neighbourhood assemblies and social enterprises. Since the global 
financial crisis of 2008, scholarly attention on novel, alternative, resilient structures has increased, 
especially in regions that have been most affected. A comprehensive literature review is therefore needed 
on these initiatives which usually aim to meet basic needs such as food, shelter, health and education at 
the community level, or build and envision autonomous communities. This paper has four aims. First, it 
proposes a new, all-encompassing conceptual framework, alternative forms of resilience, to embrace all 
issues and groups related to such initiatives, during the new millennium and its economic and political 
challenges, while taking into account the impact of the 2008 crisis. Secondly, it offers a comprehensive 
literature review on collective citizen initiatives studied through different theoretical, methodological and 
conceptual understandings. Thirdly, it provides a new typology of several approaches on novel, collective 
and solidarity-oriented critical resilience initiatives which take into account political issues, be they policy 
or social-movement related. Finally, it points to future research areas which would aim to systematically 
address the political and non-political features of citizen-collective responses.   
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
137 
1. Introduction1 
 
Collective citizen responses to economic and political threats (Almeida 2007, Kousis 
and Tilly 2005), during the recent global crisis, have varied. In this paper we 
concentrate on those collective responses in the public sphere which are manifested in 
alternative (to dominant) forms of economic and noneconomic activities by citizen 
initiatives and community-based groups confronting hard economic times and 
dwindling rights. Even though most of the activities under study could be considered to 
be part of the substantive economy in the Polanyian sense, we would like to distinguish 
the non-economic from the economic activities, so as to highlight the political and 
social aspects which are usually set at the forefront of these initiatives such as civic 
participation and empowerment, governance and advocacy. 
These community practices, which address a multitude of existential and governance 
problems, have been on the rise during the past decade in European regions, due to 
policy changes leading to increases in unemployment and precarity, cuts in social 
provisions, a decrease in credit access, changes in consuming practices and gloomy 
prospects for the future of their children. They are even more noticeable where the 
2008 global crisis - the first economic crisis of the 21st century comparable to the Great 
Depression of 1929 (Ross 2016) - impacted more heavily on citizens in Southern 
European countries (LIVEWHAT 2014a, 2014b, Norman and Uba 2015; Cruz et al this 
issue, Baumgarten this issue, Papadaki and Kalogeraki this issue, Andretta and Giudi 
this issue).  
 
1 This paper, first presented at the 2014 ECPR General Conference, has been produced in the context of 
the project “Living with Hard Times: How Citizens React to Economic Crises and Their Social and Political 
Consequences” (LIVEWHAT), especially Work Package 6. The project was funded by the European 
Commission under the 7th Framework Programme (grant agreement no. 613237). The constructive and 
valuable comments of the anonymous reviewers and Francesca Forno, editor of PACO, as well as the 
encouragement of Marco Giugni are gratefully acknowledged. 
 
KEYWORDS: alternative economy, solidarity economy,  resilience, social innovation, economic crisis, social 
movements, policy, social economy, third sector, degrowth 
 
CORRESPONDING AUTHORS: Maria Kousis, email: kousis.m@uoc.gr; Maria Paschou, email: 
paschoumaria@social.soc.uoc.gr 
 
 
 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     138 
Hard economic times and parallel governance challenges have led to transfor-
mations in citizens’ practices - from adaptive and alternative to autonomous - aimed 
towards their future survival (Conill, Castells, Cardenas and Servon 2012: 210, 222-229,  
Kousis, Kalogeraki and Mexi 2015,  Kousis, Kalogeraki, Papadaki, Loukakis, and Velonaki 
2015). Through a wide variety of solidarity practices, citizens have collectively 
responded to these challenges during the past decade through: solidarity bartering 
(Fernández 2009), Local Exchange Trading Schemes, LETS (Granger et al 2010), local 
currencies (North 2013,  Seyfang and Longhurst 2013, Schroeder 2013,  Sahakian 
2014), ethical banks (Cowton 2006,  San-Jose et al 2011,  Tischer 2013, Cornee and 
Szafarz 2013), local market cooperatives (Phillips 2012), cooperatives for the supply of 
social services, especially in health and education (Costa et al, 2012), alternative forms 
of production (Corrado 2010), critical consumption (Fonte 2013), housing and anti-
eviction citizen initiatives (Nez 2014, Fonimaya and Jimenez 2014, Romanos 2014, de 
Andrés et al 2015), spontaneous actions of resistance and reclaim (Dalakoglou 2012) 
and the reproduction of cultural knowledge via oral and artistic expression (Barkin 
2012, Lamont et al  2013).  
Most studies aim to portray and understand these initiatives through an array of 
conceptual tools and theoretical frameworks on direct action, community solidarity, 
reciprocity, citizenship and agency issues, or their intersections, in exploratory and 
descriptive rather than comparative and explanatory works.  As the number of studies 
on these alternative citizen initiatives increases, so does the number of theoretical 
approaches which scholars apply to study them. 
The purpose of this paper is four fold. First, it introduces the rich and encompassing 
concept of Alternative Forms of Resilience (AFR), which is needed to embrace the 
diversity of collective citizen initiatives aiming to respond to, bounce back from and 
confront hard economic times that have existed before, but also since the new 
millennium with its rising inequalities and the impact of the global financial crisis of 
2008. Second, it offers a broad, all-encompassing overview of the field to highlight its 
main development in the current period, as well as the key features of these collective 
solidarity initiatives that remain understudied. Third, it proposes a typology of the 
different conceptual and theoretical approaches that have been used for the study of 
collective responses to hard economic times and governance problems in order to 
show the rich diversity, not only in economic practices, but also in political orientation 
and aims. Fourth, the paper points to future research issues aimed to further 
understand AFR practices, imaginaries and approaches. 
 
 
 
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
139 
What are Alternative Forms of Resilience? 
 
Resilience is a contested concept stimulating a wide variety of interpretations and 
theoretical perspectives by social scientists, from pro-governmental to critical ones. In 
the case of family resilience, it has been defined “as the ability to withstand and 
rebound from serious life challenges. Resilience involves dynamic processes that foster 
positive adaptation in the context of significant adversity.” (Walsh 2015, 4). Critical 
works focusing on the concept of resilience and its use in policy and academic fields 
claim that it shifts responsibility away from the public sphere, while highlighting 
people’s ability to ‘bounce back’ and downplaying the related costs (e.g. Harrison 
2013). Following the 2008 crisis, however, resilience studies have moved beyond the 
level of the individual and the family, to that of collective resilience aimed to confront 
the failing social policies and social rights, to foster participatory democracy and 
collaboration, and to develop empowerment, common purpose and collective wisdom 
(Murray and Zautra 2012, 340).  Thus, recent studies on crisis and resilience reflect 
public sphere issues and concerns, while they centre  on groups and communities, as 
well as regions or countries, pointing out: ways in which collaborative processes can 
lead to resilience through building trust and interdependence (Goldstein 2012); the 
critical role of relatives, friends and mutual solidarity groups in 17 developing nations 
(Heltberg, Hossain, Reva and Turk 2013); the importance of manufacturing 
employment in shaping regional resilience (Davies 2011); and the resilience of 
engagement and participation in poor, disadvantaged communities (Hancock, Mooney 
and Neal 2012). 
Thus, resilience has not only become a major concept illuminating policy frameworks 
and addressing problems in different policy and other fields (Chandler 2014), but has 
also recently attracted the attention of social scientists studying collective solidarity 
initiatives.  In social change fields, the concept of “critical resilience” emerged out of 
the utilization of ideology from a feminist critical perspective (Anzaldúa 1999; Collins 
2000; Villenas et. al 2006) and focuses on the complexity of race, class, gender and age 
for the negotiation of power and the navigations of the those-in-need within structures 
which do not privilege them (Campa 2010, 432).  Community critical resilience has also 
been viewed as a driving force of empowerment and common goals (Juntunen and 
Hyvonen 2014, Murray and Zautra 2012, Berkes and Ross 2013), be they in developed 
or developing regions facing hard economic times. Rarer still are resilience studies 
addressing solidarity groups (Heltberg et al 2013), which include recent ones focused 
on grassroots direct actions during the crisis years (D’Alisa, Forno and Maurano 2015)  
that also engage in social movement participation (Papadaki and Kalogeraki this 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     140 
volume), based on the post-2008 experience of Southern European regions. Such 
initiatives include urban squats as resistance and resilience to capitalist relations in 
Barcelona and Rome (Cattaneo and Engel-Di Mauro 2015); resilient urban gardening 
movements in Barcelona (Camps-Calvet, Langemeyer, Calvet-Mir, Gómez-Baggethun, 
and March 2015); and resilient Italian Solidarity Purchase Groups under crisis and 
austerity (Giudi and Andretta 2015). Following Keck and Sakdapolrak (2013), D’Alisa, 
Forno and Maurano (2015, 334, 338) view these initiatives as “social resilience”, a 
“dynamic process which describes the ability of embedded social actors to foster 
collective transformation through a process of social learning and participative 
decision-making”; they point to studies highlighting the capacity to build “socially 
resilient systems” to confront the threats of neo-liberal policies at the grassroots level, 
in Southern European regions.  
Aiming to contribute in this area of work, we propose the new concept of Alternative 
Forms of Resilience, inspired by, a) the increasing use of ‘resilience’ by scholars 
studying direct actions of citizen empowerment, collectiveness, solidarity and 
resistance in hard economic times, b) the potential high-capacity of the concept of AFR 
which incorporates not only previous social and solidary economy initiatives, but also 
the more recent multitude of alternative imaginaries by citizens who confront new 
millennium challenges posed by falling rights and increasing, multiple and compound 
inequalities, within and beyond the nation state, and c) recent comparative research 
illustrating the wide array and aims of AFR practices across nine European countries2.  
The concept of Alternative Forms of Resilience simultaneously embraces the entire 
array of the conceptual and theoretical perspectives and citizen practices.  
Alternative Forms of Resilience (AFR) comprise diverse repertoires of citizen direct 
solidarity actions and aims, with economic as well as a socio-political transformative 
capacity, which are alternative to the mainstream/dominant capitalist economy, or aim 
at building autonomous communities. They usually flourish during hard economic 
times marked by austerity policies, multiple, compound inequalities, governance 
problems, the weakening of social policies, as well as the depletion of labour and social 
welfare rights. Our definition takes into consideration the paradigm of comprehensive 
alternative economy or free, constructed (not inherited), democratic (not 
philanthropic/charity) solidarity (Laville 2006: 609-610 in Ould Ahmed 2014), which is 
based on six main criteria: non-economic concerns of economic practices (related to 
the environment, health, and other social justice and  welfare issues);  rejection of 
 
2  LIVEWHAT Integrated report on alternative forms of resilience in times of crises (2016) D6.4, 
http://www.livewhat.unige.ch/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/LIVEWHAT_D6.4.pdf  
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
141 
competitive individualism of capitalist societies; promotion of self-management of 
production;  economic empowerment of the excluded/disadvantaged groups; political 
and economic equality; freedom of choice in solidarity action participation (Ould 
Ahmed 2014, 5). In addition, however, our definition of AFR points out divergence in 
their orientations. These citizen initiatives may be critical when they are formed by 
ideologically committed participants aiming to construct autonomous communities 
with collective identities (see Tilly 1994 on communitarian movements), or they may 
be reformist, seeking policy changes at the state or EU level (Kousis, Kalogeraki and 
Mexi, 2015). 
As citizen-created strategic initiatives in the public sphere, AFR offer alternative 
ways of enduring day-to-day difficulties and challenges under hard economic times, 
related mainly to urgent needs (housing, food, health, clothing, education), the 
economy, culture, energy and the environment, alternative consumption, food 
sovereignty, communications, self-organized spaces, reclaimed spaces, and others. 
Organized by formal or informal groups, AFR tend to rise from bottom up solidarity 
initiatives, formed by mutual help groups or by networks offering support between 
groups as reflected in direct actions created to help others, or themselves (LIVEWHAT 
Integrated Report D6.4, 2016).  
AFR are not always directly related to citizens facing hard economic times, but also 
to the pursuit of cultural alternatives and empowering lifestyles, as culture has been 
shaken in the past two decades and during the current economic crisis (Conill et al 
2012). These alternative economic and noneconomic transformative direct actions 
(Bosi and Zamponi 2015) aim to address a multitude of existential and governance 
problems in a resilient manner that allows their survival and/or building of 
autonomous communities covering needs linked to food, housing, health, clothes, 
childcare, education and other needs, which have either not been satisfied (or 
inadequately so), or are no longer covered by the respective social policies.  
AFR are reflected in social strategies of building community bonds, local knowledge 
systems and new networks of social interaction. Collective capacities contribute to the 
ways in which inherited cultural knowledge promotes community wellbeing and the 
protection of ecosystems, and delineates an alternative path of sustainable local 
development (Barkin 2012). New relationships rise among producers, consumers, and 
organizations with the aim of re-qualifying food as a common good instead of a 
commodity (Corrado 2010). Furthermore, the crisis of democracy, participatory and 
representative, gave impetus to the emergence of new political imaginaries and forms 
of political participation as seen in the more intense experiences in countries hard hit 
by the crisis, such as Greece (Kaika and Karaliotas 2014). 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     142 
AFR initiatives, therefore, carve out a new type of politics through the creation of 
bottom-up participatory initiatives promoting a ‘solidarity economy’, as seen in 
countries confronting crises in the past. They include new expressions of engagement, 
in a wide repertoire of citizen-run, non-capitalist practices, which facilitate their 
survival through reciprocity and networking with other communities facing similar 
problems. More importantly, however, AFR may simultaneously foster and facilitate a 
new form of political engagement/participation aimed to strengthen open, democratic 
forms of governance. They may stem from social movements, labour unions, or other 
associative structures.  
As they have done in the past, AFR by community and collective citizen practices 
illustrate the changing interactions between citizen groups and policies, especially over 
the past two decades and since the global financial crisis of 2008. The subsequent 
Eurozone crisis, whose impacts have been severe for Southern European citizens, 
created conditions leading to the flourishing of local currencies and barter networks in 
Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain. In these crisis-hit regions, resilience is reflected in the 
strengthening of social networks and community practices to foster solidarity in the 
face of crises, changes of lifestyles towards more sustainable forms of consumption 
and production, and/or developing new artistic expression  (LIVEWHAT Integrated 
Report D6.4, 2016). 
The paper offers a review of the streams of scholarly interest in  the various forms of 
citizen collective responses in hard economic times. By utilizing the term Alternative 
Forms of Resilience, it is our intention to begin a dialogue on different disciplinary 
approaches and theoretical conceptualizations all of which contribute to the 
understanding of multifarious citizen collective actions, of their dynamics and 
transformative societal potential. It is, in particular, the new millennium and the 
current context of the economic crisis which reinforces and broadens the scope of such 
actions, while attracting academic interest. It is envisaged that Alternative Forms of 
Resilience will contribute to moving the social and solidary economy a step forward, 
where the political dimension of such actions will be further highlighted for the benefit 
of future research.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
143 
2.  From Social and Solidarity Economy to Alternative Forms of Resilience  
 
A rich literature3, in French, Spanish and English, has been developing on the ‘social 
economy’, ‘human economy’, ‘third sector’ and ‘solidarity economy’ over  different 
time periods across global regions. One of the widely used concepts, solidarity 
economy, was coined by Chilean professor of philosophy Luis Razeto and used by one 
of the oldest of such movements in Latin America (Ould Ahmed 2014). Although these 
concepts aptly describe  their pluriactive character in times of crisis, AFR is a more 
fitting term to encompass the richness and dynamism of such initiatives not only in the 
past, but even more so during the new millennium and its new order of  hard 
conditions which citizens increasingly confront due to austerity policies and 
shrinking/subsiding social policies, especially since the global financial crisis of 2008,  as 
was the case in previous waves of economic crises in global regions. 
Three years before the onset of the current economic crisis, Moulaert and Ailenei 
(2005) traced these alternative practices as far back as their ancient Egyptian, Greek 
and Roman roots (citing Defourny and Develtere 1997, Demoustier 2001). 
Concentrating on  the period since the medieval times, given the rich associative life in 
Europe, but also in Byzantium, the Muslim countries, India, Africa and America 
(Moulaert and Ailenei 2005,2038), they proposed that,  
 
… each epoch has its own socioeconomic conditions bringing subsequent opportunities and 
challenges to the lien solidaire (solidarity bond) which it produced….when the economic 
growth engine starts to stutter, formal distribution mechanisms begin to fail and new social 
forces develop and give rise to alternative institutions and mechanisms of solidarity and 
redistribution as a means of addressing the failures of the institutions of the socioeconomic 
movements to guarantee solidarity among economic agents. (Moulaert and Ailenei, 2005, 
2038). 
 
Thus, reflecting a concern comparable to that of political opportunities and threats 
by political process scholars studying social movements (e.g. Goldstone and Tilly 2001), 
Moulaert and Ailenei (2005) offer a promising historically-based perspective to the 
study of collective citizens’ initiatives, pointing to the importance of structural 
economic threats. Waves of ‘economie sociale’ and solidarity practices have emerged 
 
3  See journals such as Revue international de l’economie sociale (RECMA) founded in 1921 - 
http://www.recma.org/   
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     144 
and re-emerged, especially since the industrial revolution/19th century, in reaction to 
economic threats, exploitative relations and poverty faced by considerable segments of 
populations (Moulaert and Ailenei 2005). The associations, co-operatives and other 
alternative/social economy structures that arose across Europe and were subsequently 
institutionalized at the close  of the 19th/start of 20th century were simultaneously 
influenced by 18th and 19th utopian socialism, Christian socialism, and the liberal 
movement – reflecting also the importance of cultural factors  (Defourny and Develtere 
1997).  
Three generations of social economy structures have been linked to the three large 
pre-WWII crises (Moulaert and Ailenei 2005), while a new generation of similar 
solidarity structures are linked to increasing inequalities in the new millennium and the 
global financial crisis of 2008. The first generation refers to “those of the 1840s-1850s 
transition from the old regulation (via craftsmen corporations) to competitive 
regulation, leading to mutual support organisations (mutuelles) as a form of resistance 
of craftsmen workers” (Moulaert and Ailenei 2005, 2041). The second generation is 
comprised of the agricultural and savings cooperatives that rose in response to the 
crisis (1873–95) of the extensive regime of accumulation with heavy investments in 
agriculture and natural resources. The third generation sprang “from the economic 
collapse of 1929–32 and was mostly a product of the crisis in competitive regulation. 
The consumption cooperatives for food and housing supported workers and 
unemployed people, allowing them to secure goods and services at prices they could 
afford” (Moulaert and Ailenei 2005, 2041). 
The  post-war period witnessed new reactions of a fourth wave, this time to the 
crisis of the mass-production system in the 1970s with the rise of an alternative 
movement incorporating the rise of co-operative and ecological actions, as well as the 
‘small is beautiful’ local development schemes, offering alternatives to state services 
encouraging social bond strengthening within communities. The social and solidary 
economy movements of the post-war period first flourished in France and Latin 
America. The UK, US, Africa and Asia have followed their own trajectories of solidarity 
movements while developing strong links and networks among them - e.g. with the 
British human economy movement - but not yet with those in the US (Ould Ahmed 
2014). Scientific networks on AFR initiatives were established especially in 
francophone, south American and African regions; such as EMES (Emergence des 
Enterprises Sociales en Europe), RILESS (Red de Investigadores Latinoamericanos de 
Economia Social y Solidaria), CRISES (Centre de Recherche sur les Innovations Sociales 
in Quebec), PSES3 (Pôle de Socio-économie Solidaire) and REMESS (Réseau Marocain 
d’Economie Sociale et Solidaire), (Ould Ahmed 2014, 2-3). International conferences 
and forums were also organized worldwide; they include the Globalisation of Solidarity 
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
145 
(Lima 1997; Québec 2001), which became RIPESS (Réseau Intercontinental de 
Promotion de l’Economie Sociale et Solidaire) (Dakar 2005, Luxembourg 2009); the 
World Social Forum, Brazil 2001–2003, India 2004, Kenya 2007, and other cities; and 
FBES (Forum Brésilien de l’Economie Solidaire), active in most Brazilian cities (Laville et 
al 2005 in Ould Ahmed 2014, 2-3).   
Overall, during the 1980s and 1990s, high unemployment, public finance crisis and 
decreasing welfare state provisions facilitated the creation of alternative structures 
such as entreprises d’insertion and worker-owned cooperatives and reactions against 
neo-liberal and individualistic ideology (Moulaert and Ailenei 2005, 2041). The South 
American economic crisis of the late nineties triggered interest in studying Argentina 
and Brazil (Fernández 2009, Primavera 2010). The nineties also witnessed a rise in a 
wide variety of alternative consumer-producer practices and direct action initiatives, 
under the influence of the Global Justice Movement, mostly in Europe and the US 
(Forno and Graziano 2014, Bosi and Zamponi 2015). 
A new fifth wave of solidarity structures and alternative actions have attracted the 
attention of scholars during the new millennium, especially since the global crisis of 
2008 - also called the Great Recession - and the rising inequalities (Piketty 2015) which 
are multiple and compound.  As recent work has emphasized, direct social actions 
aimed at social change are not new but (re)surface under hard economic times (Bosi 
and Zamponi 2015). The more recent solidarity structures since the 2008 crisis period 
have been studied as resilient actions (e.g. D’Alisa et al 2015,  Giudi and Andretta 2015,  
Camps-Calvet et al 2015) aiming towards non-capitalist and political imaginaries. 
During the last five years, there has been a rise of such actions and related studies, 
especially  in Southern European countries, where the impacts of the crisis were 
deeper: i.e. Greece (Dalakoglou 2012,  Sotiropoulou 2012,  Pautz and Komninou 2013,  
Petropoulou 2013,  Papadaki 2015, Papadaki and Kalogeraki this issue); Spain (Conill et 
al 2012,  Calvo and Morales 2014,  de Armino 2014,  de Andres et al 2015,  Nez 2014,  
Cruz, Martinez and Blanco this issue); Portugal (Parente et al  2012, Baumgarten, this 
issue); and Italy (Costa et al 2012,  Fonte 2013,  Forno and Graziano 2014,  Bosi and 
Zamboni 2015,  Andretta and Giudi 2015). Using case studies, secondary data, as well 
as online sources through quantitative and qualitative methods, these cover either 
specific issues and initiatives, or local level case studies. 
The focus of most studies during this period is either on the non-capitalist/post-
capitalist, or on the political features of solidarity practices. Concerning the economy-
related traits, studies focus on non-capitalist aspects, or on post-capitalist/degrowth 
initiatives. A considerable number of studies focus on the enhancement of the local 
economy, cooperatives, mutual companies, or social enterprises (e.g. Neamtan 2009; 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     146 
Nassioulas 2012a, 2012b, Buckingham and Teasdale 2013). Studies on, or including the 
South European experience link alternative forms of resilience to hard economic times 
and the recent Eurozone crisis. For example, alternative currencies have been studied 
together with exchange networks, free bazaars and several sui generis schemes of 
solidarity action in Greece (Sotiropoulou 2012), different contexts of alternative 
currency adoption have been  compared across Germany, UK and the USA (North 
2014), and  complementary currencies have been studied across Argentina, Japan and 
Switzerland (Sahakian 2014). Regional social cooperatives and their role in terms of 
economic and financial performance have attracted the attention of scholars (Costa et 
al  2012), while local community cooperative structures across various sectors, from 
food production and energy to ecotourism and handicrafts, have caught the attention 
of other scholars (Barkin 2012). Ethical banks and how they differentiate from other 
credit institutions are the focus of another group of studies (San-Jose Retolaza and 
Gutierrez-Goiria 2009, 2011). The forms of action and the issues addressed by citizen 
collective actions of resilience are simultaneously closely related to their physical 
environments. For example, actions which are developed in rural environments 
address issues of resource management and agricultural production (Barkin 2012, 
Corrado 2010), seed networks of alternative agro-food systems (Corrado 2010), or 
consumer networks which support buying products directly from producers on ethical 
and/or solidarity grounds (Fonte 2013). Major dissatisfaction with capitalism and its 
obstacles, as well as a wide repertoire of non-capitalist economic practices based on 
altruism, non-monetary exchange and cooperation are the focus of other scholars (e.g. 
Conill et al 2012).  
Although economic factors have been a sustained issue for scholars of collective 
reactions by citizens in Latin America and India (Uba 2005, Almeida 2007, 2010), during 
the past two decades these factors have  been neglected in the collective action 
literature and have only recently appeared in social movement discussions (Kousis and 
Tilly 2005, Goodwin and Hetland 2009, Kousis 2014, Kriesi 2014) due to economic 
threats posed by hard economic times and increasing multiple inequalities.   
Focusing on political traits of solidarity practices in the new millennium, especially 
since the 2008 crisis, scholars point to the political delegitimation of existing 
institutions and parties in power and their impact on citizens’ lives. Especially in the 
European periphery, the combination of austerity and neoliberal policies of 
privatization and deregulation have led to the inability of governments to address 
citizens’ demands to safeguard democracy and their rights (della Porta, Andretta, 
Fernandes, Romanos, O’Connor and Vogiatzoglou 2017).  In this context, studies have 
connected alternative forms of resilience with the politics of the crisis, i.e. with issues 
of public resistance to austerity and collective tactics of recovery, offering, however, 
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
147 
limited systematic empirical data. Some highlight the relationship to social movements, 
such as the movement of the squares or the Indignados movement (e.g. Nez 2014, 
Kaika and Karaliotas 2014). Others record the influx of human resources into projects 
of alternative actions of public reclaim at the grassroots level such as guerrilla 
gardening initiatives (Vradis and Dalakoglou 2011), or more confrontational forms of 
actions such as collective supermarkets/expropriation as a symbolic means of wealth 
re-distribution (Pautz and Komninou 2013), or actions of reclaim (Dalakoglou 2012). 
Grassroots solidarity towards resilience building is also expressed by the movement 
against the evictions in Spain, which adopts both contentious and conventional action 
(Romanos 2014) and a protest tactic (escrache) transnationally transmitted from 
another protest site (Fominaya and Jimenez 2014). 
Furthermore, scholarly engagement (scientific activism) in the broad field of AFR also 
contributes through participatory action research in which the researcher is involved in 
critical, reflective and deliberately political modes of participation (Gibson-Graham 
2006, Chatterton and Pickerill 2010,  Cornwell 2012,  Arampatzi 2016,  Darby 2016). 
Since the mid 90s scholars in human geography and social anthropology around the 
globe have comprised the research community of diverse economies who attempted 
via means of action research “to counter the ingrained belief that capitalist economic 
relations are the only driving economic force [and to] … reclaim the economy as a site 
of ethical decision-making and practice” (Graham and Roelvink 2010, 329-330). This 
stream of research invites the researcher into a ‘performative epistemology’, in which 
academic production generates possibilities where none existed, and into an 
experimental orientation to research ‘hybrid research collectives’, where researchers 
view themselves as co-participants in the making of new worlds (Gibson-Graham 2008, 
628). 
Fresh empirical data on AFR, based on a random sample of 4,297 alternative action 
organizations (AAOs) focused on solidarity practices from 2007 to 2016, across nine 
European countries, illustrate the wide repertoire of actions, aims and groups which 
reflect both creativity as well as resilience (LIVEWHAT Integrated report on Alternative 
Forms of Resilience, D6.4, 2016). High peaks are visible during the crisis period for 
countries more deeply affected by hard economic times – including almost half or 
more than half of the AAOs found in Spain, Greece, France, Italy, and Poland. By 
contrast, AAOs in the countries not significantly affected by the crisis are relatively 
older and more institutionalized, since most of them were founded in the ‘80s and ‘90s 
– with a noticeable rise in Germany in the late nineties. Furthermore, AAOs founded 
prior to the global economic crisis show a higher frequency of rights-based values (e.g. 
equality, civil rights, human rights, social justice, peace and safety) and economic issues 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     148 
(e.g. economic prosperity, accountability, professionalism). In stark contrast, AAOs 
created after the economic crisis show the highest frequency of empowerment and 
participation values, as well as embracing diversity and sustainability values (LIVEWHAT 
Integrated report on Alternative Forms of Resilience, D6.4, 2016).  
All the above contributions illustrate that the political and economic threats and 
opportunities in the past two decades intensified, broadened and brought to the 
surface resilient citizen collective participation in direct actions of civic empowerment, 
solidarity, strengthening of community bonds and democratization. While Social and 
Solidarity Economy provides a satisfactory framework for the understanding of a wide 
repertoire of actions for the 20th century, given the rapid developments of the new 
millennium, especially the global financial crisis and widening pervasive inequalities 
across global regions, AFR offers an integrated, encompassing framework that brings 
together the diverse solidarity activities and treats them as distinct manifestations 
striving towards resilience, while they diverge in terms of their economic and political 
imaginaries. 
 
 
3. A Typology of Approaches for the study of AFR: Conceptual, Theoretical and 
Political Orientations 
 
Following the presentation of the transition from social and solidarity economy to 
alternative forms of resilience, this section provides an encompassing typology of AFR, 
embracing the different conceptual and theoretical approaches, while highlighting the 
main features of citizen initiatives in relation to their economic and political traits.  
To recap, Alternative Forms of Resilience are conceptualised as nonmainstream/-
capitalist economic and noneconomic activities through which citizens build 
community resilience when confronted with hard economic times, austerity policies, 
decreasing social welfare policies and threatened economic and social rights. AFR cover 
a broad spectrum of actions, which address existential and governance issues, draw on 
values of solidarity, establish reciprocal relations and aim at civic empowerment or 
new autonomous communities, by introducing alternative structures of economic 
exchange and lifestyles, as well as new forms of political participation. By operationa-
lizing “resilience” in our conceptualization of these citizen collective actions, we 
emphasize the capacity to adapt and transform at the economic and political level. 
AFR simultaneously constitute an inclusive theoretical framework, extending and 
including that of “Social and Solidarity Economy” (Moulaert and Ailenei 2005), which 
embraces perspectives focused on the transformative potential of such actions in the 
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
149 
economy, as well as those which bring to the fore the political elements of the 
alternativeness which these resilient initiatives promote. As seen in Figure 1 our 
proposed typology extends and incorporates the three approaches of Moulaert and 
Ailenei’s (2005) basic typology: Social Economy, Third Sector and Solidarity Economy. 
Reflecting concerns related to the current crisis and 21st century hard economic times, 
deepening inequalities, governance and environmental issues, Figure 1 offers a wider 
typology scheme that includes more recent types of AFR which have appeared in the 
past decade, especially through South European studies and perspectives.  It also 
denotes the policy or social movement orientation of the initiatives studied. 
Overall, the proposed typology distinguishes between nine, key theoretical 
approaches, ranging from more reformist to radical or autonomous ones, engaged in 
understanding and interpreting older as well as more recent waves of alternative 
economic and noneconomic action organizations and groups, before and during the 
2008 global crisis. Even though, due to the hybrid and similar nature of many 
alternative initiatives, overlaps between these approaches do exist, each of the 
approaches tends to focus on, or emphasize specific types of alternative citizen 
structures and actions, especially when approaching the two contrasting poles. 
The term ‘Third Sector’ was especially promoted by Rifkin in the mid-nineties, 
referring to all non-public and non-profit oriented activities (Moulaert and Ailenei 
2005), while following the recent crisis, it has been supported by Stiglitz (2009). It 
constitutes an Anglo-American conception, which places emphasis on the voluntary 
and non-statutory sector and the role of individual volunteers (Bryant and Pozdeev 
2014), thereby diverging from continental European and Latin American perspectives 
which also include co-operative and mutual support organizations (Moulaert and 
Ailenei 2005, 2043,  Ould Ahmed 2014, 3). Studies illustrate the links with sponsors and 
state agencies and the importance of individual volunteering, usually in third sector 
organizations and initiatives. Recent works focus on the changing “austere relations” 
between the market, the state and the third sector, as the latter is called to fill in the 
gaps in welfare provision to cover citizen needs (Bennett et al 2015, 100, Macmillan 
2015). Supporters such as Giddens (2008) emphasize the important role of NGOs under 
neoliberalism, with more recent scholars pointing also to the impact of austerity on the 
third sector (Milbourne 2013, Bennett Langmead and Archer2015, 100, Macmillan 
2015, Clarke, Huliaras and Sotiropoulos 2015). 
 
 
 
 
 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     150 
 
Figure 1. A typology of AFR: from reformist to autonomous  
  
 
 
 
According to Moulaert and Ailenei (2005, 2044-2046) Social Economy is a hybrid 
concept, yet, it could be defined as “the more restricted economy of co-operatives and 
mutuelles” illustrated by “firms with social objectives or socially inspired work 
organizations” where members are shareholders among whom profits are distributed. 
This approach also includes studies on Human Economy or Social Enterprises. Scholars 
addressing these concepts have also paid more attention to their relationship with 
national and EU agencies and policies aiming to assist these socio-economic 
entrepreneurs or Social Businesses, especially during hard economic times (Nassioulas 
2012b,  Parente et al 2012,  Chavez  and Monzon  2012,  Sabatii, Modena, and 
Tortia  2014,  Borzaga, Bodini, Carini, Depedri, Galera and Salvatori 2014,  Poledrini 
2015). Recognizing the importance of Social Economy, states such as Brazil, Germany, 
Italy, Spain and Greece have established social economy laws and agencies. Social 
Economy introduces a wide array of innovations to the market, with a social purpose 
(e.g. impact investment, socially responsible investment, social banking), which differ 
from bottom-up, community based groups engaging in solidarity activities, like 
cooperatives, community currencies and time banks (Neamtan 2009). EU institutions 
have also recently launched a variety of initiatives and official documents (more than 
170 since 2000) that support social and work integration policies and recognize the 
importance of contribution towards social inclusion, quality jobs creation, 
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
151 
entrepreneurship promotion, access to social services, social and environmental 
innovation, the European Social model and social cohesion (Kousis, Kalogeraki and 
Mexi 2015).  
During the past decade, a Social Innovation approach has developed, making a 
notable contribution to the literature on alternative economy studies, especially by 
Moulaert and his co-authors (e.g. Moulaert et al 2007, Moulaert et al 2010, Cruz et al, 
this issue). In a series of publications, such scholars promote bottom-up social 
innovation as the outcome of social and institutional mobilization covering social needs 
and empowering social groups towards open governance systems (Moulaert et al 
2013). “Social innovation occurs when the mobilisation of social and institutional forces 
succeeds in bringing about the satisfaction of previously alienated human needs, the 
relative empowerment of previously silent or excluded social groups through the 
creation of new ‘capabilities’ and ultimately, changes in the existing social –and 
power–relations towards a more inclusive and democratic governance system” 
(González et al, 2010, 54). Within the Social Innovation perspective “socio-political 
transformation” is also promoted (Swyngedouw, Moulaert and Rodriguez 2003) 
reflecting the momentum built by social innovation initiatives for a more effective 
community empowerment and the democratization of state apparatus (Miquel, 
Cabeza, and Anglada 2013, Haddock 2013).  Vaillancourt (2009) adopts a similar 
approach, focused on reflexive modernity issues and on the ways in which the Social 
Economy can contribute to the democratization of the state and public policy through 
the processes of co-production and co-construction. Favouring a ‘solidarity-based’ 
model in the context of an open-governance state, Vaillancourt finds that in the case of 
housing policy in Canada and Quebec, Social Economy initiatives produced social 
innovations that improved the related public policy. 
Culture shapes the economy argue Castells, Caraca and Cardoso (2012,11-12) and 
thus trust - build in networks by social support and personal contact - is vital for 
engaging in non-profit Alternative Economy practices  (Conill et al 2012, 210, 222-229) 
that include cooperative, barter and agricultural networks, social currencies, and self-
management initiatives. Following the 2008 crisis in the US and the EU, these 
alternative economic cultures are born into social movements which are rising in hard 
economic times across the globe. They are based on different values concerning the 
meaning of everyday life, and are one of four different layers of the economy in the 
21st century.   
Solidarity Economy approaches highlight the plethora of bottom-up alternative 
initiatives and practices based on cooperation and reciprocity and stressing of lien 
social (Moulaert and AIlenei 2005), not involving profits. For example, the importance 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     152 
of solidarity and people-centred cooperatives beyond the current structural dominance 
of capital is highlighted by Satgar (2007). The term economie solidaire is used by 
continental Europeans and Latin Americans to refer to a new generation of more 
recent, social economy practices. Yet, European and South American approaches are 
both distinct and complementary to each other (Ould Ahmed 2014, 3-4). Those actions 
and initiatives, which follow solidarity economy principles, are mainly devoted to 
covering urgent needs, as well as fostering self-determination and cooperation 
(Bauhardt 2014).  
A most recent approach has surfaced highlighting an important but understudied 
dimension of alternative initiatives, i.e. the relationship of AFR to social movements. 
Forno and Graziano (2014) make a vital contribution with their work that integrates 
political consumerism and social movement theories and points out the importance of 
Sustainable Community Movement Organizations (SCMOs). These involve collective 
initiatives which empower consumer and producer networks, on a smaller scale, to 
confront hard economic times. Related studies pay close attention to critical consumer 
practices and the links of SCMOs with the Global Justice Movement (e.g. D’Alisa, Forno 
and Maurano 2015,  Giudi and Andretta 2015,  Bosi and Zamponi 2015,  Andretta and 
Giudi this issue, Papadaki and Kalogeraki this issue, Baumgarten this issue). 
Departing from the above approaches, the last three (degrowth, post-capitalist and 
anarchist) tend to be more autonomous and communitarian oriented, aiming to build 
autonomous communities by ideologically committed participants (Tilly 1994). 
“Degrowth/decroissance”  has been mainly a 21st century initiative towards a more 
radical alternative economy pursued on a voluntary  basis, which confronts dominant 
economic paradigms with grassroots strategies centring on building autonomous 
collective alternatives outside of mainstream economic institutions, especially at the 
local level (Martinez Alier 2012,  Demaria, Schneider, Sekulova and Martinez-Alier  
2013).  One such example is Italy’s Reti de Economic Solidale (Solidarity Economy 
Networks) consisting of more than twenty Solidarity Economy districts with hundreds 
of small enterprises focused on socio-ecological objectives (Demaria et al 2013). The 
‘Post-growth’ approach is also similar to Degrowth. It prioritizes people and the planet 
over capitalism (D’Alisa, Demaria and Kallis 2014), as advocated by Joan Martinez-
Allier, Serge Latouche, the New Economic Forum and others. The focus here is on 
emerging forms of collective ownership by ecological and social entrepreneurs in 
Western Europe (e.g. Kunze and Becker 2014).  One such example is that of the 
cooperative Som Energia, established recently by Girona University of Catalonia staff 
and students (Kunze and Becker 2014).  This theoretical perspective is inspired by the 
Commons approach, influenced by Ostrom (1990) and the Global Justice Movement. 
According to De Angelis (2014, 2003, 1), “Commons suggest alternative, noncom-
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
153 
modified means to fulfill social needs… Commons are necessarily created and 
sustained by communities, i.e. by social networks of mutual aid, solidarity, and 
practices of human exchange that are not reduced to the market form.” The approach 
has also been adopted in recent work on Southern Europe (D’Alisa et al  2015). 
From a post-capitalist/post-foundational perspective, the emphasis is placed on the 
everyday practices of autonomous activism, thus problematizing political activism 
beyond the idea of the militant subject towards the establishment of ‘autonomous 
geographies’ (Chatterton and Pickerill 2010). Allegedly ‘post-political’ initiatives such as 
the Syntagma Square gatherings in Athens are seen as materializing “alternative ways 
of being, doing and saying in common […]nurturing a nomadic re-territorialisation of 
democratic politics” (Kaika and Karaliotas 2014, 256). In a similar vein, grassroots 
conflicts under crisis generate practices of solidarity-making and new forms of self-
organization which cultivate a philosophy of praxis for forging an alternative hegemony 
against austerity (Calvário, Velegrakis and Kaika 2016). 
Finally, other most critical approaches in the AFR continuum are those of anarchist 
initiatives. Eco-anarchist approaches, such as social ecology (Bookchin 1986) and 
bioregionalism have a long history of bottom-up alternative and autonomous 
community building. In the past decade, works following  Anarchism, which offer an 
alternative participatory economy perspective,  have linked  values of solidarity, 
diversity, equity, with self-management anarchist ideology (e.g. Albert 2013). 
Alternative agro-food networks are also inspired by critical, anarchist, and ecological 
thinking (Corrado 2010). Anarchists are involved in popular social movements, 
neighbourhood committees, or rank-and-file union organizing (Shantz 2013). Green 
anarchists have largely supported the British LETS system for adopting an alternative 
economy lifestyle (North 2007, 92). Anarchist thought has also influenced the squatting 
phenomenon as a practice of alternative economic and socio-spatial relations 
(Cattaneo and Gavalda 2010, 582).  Finally, the tactic of collective expropriation as an 
action of resistance towards crisis policies is an anarchist expression with connotations 
of redistribution and state power derogation (Pautz and Komninou 2013). 
 
AFR Approaches: From Reformist to Autonomous 
 
The approaches in Figure 1 are not presented in a strict scaling manner, but as a 
more general ordering that takes into account the overall political orientation of the 
initiatives, and illustrates the ways in which they diverge, in order to construct research 
questions for future works on the political aspects of AFRs. More specifically, according 
to our typology of AFR approaches, although most citizen initiatives have social 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     154 
movement links, Figure 1 reveals two major orientations based on the types of 
initiatives covered. Listed towards the right axis are autonomous AFR, those that tend 
to centre  on mutual help and communitarian values at the grassroots level, with 
strong social movement identities and imaginaries,  while located towards the left axis 
are reformist AFR, that tend to seek either state or supra-state policies and 
collaborations, i.e. tend to be more policy oriented, with less critical orientations.  
Intensified by the economic and governance challenges of the past two decades, 
particularly during the harsh crisis period, scholarly interest in these two distinct types 
of resilient practices (reformist vs autonomous), has underlined the need to recognize 
the political orientation or disposition of citizen collective initiatives of resilience, or 
AFR, as a critical factor in the formulation of research questions for their study. 
These two research stream tendencies – supportive, corrective or remedial to 
conventional state and institutionalized structures, or autonomous, rejecting the 
former - are vividly reflected in resilient citizen practices. For example, recent calls by 
solidarity activists (Hart, Laville, and Cattani  2010, 11) point to the need to strengthen 
alliances of grassroots groups, to harness not only voluntary reciprocity but public 
policy, while Alliance 21 takes a more developmental path, stressing the need for 
measuring and assessing SSE activities, being politically recognized, establishing an 
international lobby at UNDP, and pressuring national and international authorities such 
as UNO, WTO, towards policies of intervention that incorporate SSE  as an integral part 
of sustainable development (Fraisse et al in Ould Ahmed 2014,8).  In Brazil, a National 
Secretariat for Solidarity Economy was established under the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment,  inspired by  the thousands of “barter clubs” (clubes de trueque) created 
in Argentina as a strategy to cope with the crisis (Primavera 2010). 
The relationship of SSE and EU policies has been highlighted in a group of solidarity 
and social economy works (e.g. Defourny and Nyssens 2012, Alix 1993, Alix 2012, 
European Parliament 2011,  Kousis, Kalogeraki and Mexi 2015,  Mendell and Alain 
2015). This is an outcome of the European Commission’s acknowledgement of social 
economy as a sector and a specific form of governance based on cooperation during 
the nineties (Alix and Baudet 2013). Scientific activists often propose a renewal of the 
solidarity and social economy perspective through a ‘Commons approach’ following 
Ostrom (2010) (Alix 2012). Such initiatives have trickled down to country level, as seen 
in the 2011 Spanish Law on Social Economy and EU’s Small Business Act (Julia and 
Chaves 2012) as well as the recent social economy initiatives (Nassioulas 2012a), and 
the new law in Greece on social economy, Law 4430/2016, under SYRIZA’s govern-
ment.  
At the same time, over the past decade, AFR scholars have shifted towards the study 
of political issues, brought into the field by the Social Innovation approach (Moulaert et 
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
155 
al 2013,  Cruz, Martinez and Blanco this issue) as well as Alternative Economy, 
Sustainable Community Movement Organizations, Degrowth, Postgrowth, Post-
capitalist and Anarchist approaches (e.g. Castels et al 2012, Forno and Graziano 2014, 
D’Alisa et al  2015, D’Alisa, Demaria and Kallis 2014, De Angelis 2014, Cattaneo and 
Gavalda 2010, Andretta and Giudi this issue). While the former highlights issues of 
empowerment and governance, the latter are especially attentive to the links with 
social movements and action strategies. Although these studies are limited, the 
political and economic context within which they arise, and the issues they point to, 
contribute to a new research agenda for scholars of the area.   
The contribution of the five recent approaches - Alternative Economy, Sustainable 
Community Movement Organizations, Degrowth, Postgrowth, Post-capitalist/post-
foundational and Anarchist - is especially important as it reflects the political-economic 
opportunities and threats of the past two decades and the recent crisis, and sheds light 
on the relationship between alternative socio-economic practices and social movement 
organizations. 
Scholarly interest in the two poles of resilience (reformist vs autonomous), as 
intensified in the new millennium and particularly during the harsh crisis period, 
underlines the need to recognize the political orientation or disposition of AFR as a 
critical factor in the formulation of research hypotheses for future study. Reformist 
resilient alternative actions are oriented towards policy, seek collaboration or 
partnerships with state and economic actors, and are supportive or remedial to 
existing and conventional structures, while critical resilience initiatives have strong ties 
to social movements, are autonomous and dismissive of the latter.    
 
 
4. Conclusion: reflections and areas of research for future studies of AFR  
 
By proposing the encompassing concept of AFR, this paper first brought together the 
multitude of studies and approaches on the expanding repertoire of collective and 
resilient citizen initiatives confronting economic threats and governance challenges in 
the new millennium. In so doing, it has also pointed to the diverging political 
orientations and the links to social movements. 
The development and creation of AFR has been influenced significantly by state 
policies, mainly in the form of major economic threats to larger segments of 
populations. This has been manifested either through the imposition of harsh austerity 
policies, or through the dismantling or withdrawal, gradual or sudden, of social policies 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     156 
supporting economic and social rights. Therefore, AFR arise as alternative - to the 
mainstream capitalist economy - and resilient citizen created initiatives, or they 
flourish during hard economic times marked by austerity policies, the weakening of 
social policies, as well as the depletion of labour and social welfare rights. Given 
significant cuts in social policies, future research should examine: the extent to which 
alternative activities are aimed at survival/basic needs oriented resilience i.e. at 
covering urgent and basic needs related to food, housing and health, as well as the 
types of participating/recipient-beneficiary groups it involves (such as families, children, 
women and migrant groups). 
As witnessed during  the global financial crisis of 2008, economic change and 
variation also affect AFR, either by shaping citizen responses to political and economic 
threats and opportunities, or by constituting themselves significant threats and 
opportunities (Kousis and Tilly 2005, 7). Consequently, future research could centre on 
the economic and political opportunities and threats which constrain or facilitate the 
organizing of AFR by citizens confronting hard economic times as well as governance 
challenges. Through comparative studies offering systematic data beyond the local 
level, such research would lead to an examination of AFR cycles, the open or closed 
nature of institutionalized political economy structures, access to resources and the 
elite allies of AFR.  
By applying AFR as a conceptual framework, we offer an overview of the basic 
theoretical and empirical approaches on citizen organized or community based groups, 
as well as the main issues they address, drawing also on the recent European 
experience during the crisis period. All of the approaches studying AFR face the 
challenge of a multi-faceted and complex social phenomenon with cultural, economic, 
and political dimensions, which tend to involve social movement activism. Additionally, 
the typology also depicts the variance in political orientation, from reformist to 
autonomous. Although our typology illustrates that in general AFR citizen organizations 
and groups tend to have a social movement orientation, they nevertheless portray 
divergent political aims, from seeking to influence and collaborate on state policies, to 
establishing autonomous, independent communities with strong social movement 
identities. For example, AFR initiatives that tend to be policy orientated and seek 
collaboration or partnerships with state and economic actors, are becoming more 
visible, as seen for example, in the case of the new 2016 law on social economy in 
Greece. This leads to a third research question for future works: What are the main 
features of action repertoires and political partners, collaborators or networks, across 
the wide array of citizen groups and organizations, especially for reformist and 
autonomous organizations and groups?  
Maria Kousis and Maria Paschou, Alternative Forms of Resilience 
 
 
 
157 
Based on the undertaken review, there has been a lack of systematic cross-national 
research facilitating comparative analysis on the political character of alternative socio-
economic practices, including the profile, frames and aims of the participants and 
alternative organizational structures, the collaborations and links to informal networks, 
formal institutions and associations, as well as to social movement organizations.  
Systematically researching  the social movements’ dimension of AFR would facilitate 
bringing together different strands of literature as well as understanding the 
opportunities and threats related to the survival of formal organizations (e.g. 
cooperatives) including community-based, mutual help groups, or networks of groups 
supporting each other. This can be done using social movement oriented theories and 
methods, such as political process theory and a new methodological approach 
specifically created for the study of AFR, i.e. Alternative Action Organization analysis 
(Kousis, Giugni and Lahusen 2016). This leads to a fourth research question for future 
works: What are the AFR’s mobilizing structures, claims and framing processes 
(diagnostic, prognostic frames), as well as their imaginaries (aims and proposed routes 
to resolve the challenges they confront? Furthermore, following recent work by Cruz et 
al, on this issue, a fifth research question is: What are the impacts of the spatial 
features of AFR over the past decade?  How and why do regions and their respective 
socio-political-economic structures matter in the rise and development of AFR? 
Finally, although recent research is in progress, there have been a very limited 
number of systematic, cross-national, multi-methods empirical studies on AFR. Such 
research could offer valuable knowledge on cross-country differences and similarities, 
especially on the political aspects and their major determining factors. Alternatively, in-
depth studies could focus on new political arenas of AFR, bringing to light  new political 
spaces beyond the local, national and supra-national, as well as novel issues through 
open methodologies founded on an epistemology of plurality, yet grounded in 
communitarian justice imaginaries.  
Thus, inspired by the path of recent work on citizens’ alternative and resilient, 
collective responses to economic and governance challenges, as well as a partial 
convergence between alternative resilient citizens’ reactions and citizens’ collective 
resistance, this  paper proposes the adoption of elements from social movement 
related theoretical and methodological approaches to study AFR. This would enable 
future research to enrich our understanding of the increasingly important Alternative 
Forms of Resilience.  
 
 
 
Partecipazione e conflitto, 10(1) 2017: 136-168, DOI: 10.1285/i20356609v10i1p136 
                                                                                                                     158 
References 
Almeida P. (2007), “Defensive Mobilization: Popular Movements against Economic 
Adjustment Policies in Latin America”, Latin American Perspectives, 34(3): 123-139. 
doi: 10.1177/0094582X07300942  
Almeida P.  (2010), “Social Movement Partyism: Collective Action and Oppositional 
Political Parties”, in N. Van Dyke and H. J. McCommonm (eds), Strategic Alliances: 
Coalition Building and Social Movements, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press. 
Albert M. (2013), “The parecon proposal”, in J. Shantz and J.B. Macdonald (eds.), 
Beyond Capitalism: building democratic alternatives for today and the future, 
London: Bloomsbury Academic.  
Alix N. (1993), “Impact of European law on social welfare associations”, ISTR 
