Diversity, Disparity and Territorial Resilience in the Context of the Economic Crisis: An Analysis of Rural Areas in Southern Spain

sustainabilityArticleDiversity, Disparity and Territorial Resilience in theContext of the Economic Crisis: An Analysis of RuralAreas in Southern SpainPedro Sánchez-Zamora * and Rosa Gallardo-CobosDepartment of Agricultural Economics, Sociology and Policy, ETSIAM, Universidad de Córdoba,14014 Córdoba, Spain; rosagallardo@uco.es* Correspondence: pedro.sanchez@uco.es; Tel.: +34-957-21-84-44Received: 17 February 2019; Accepted: 18 March 2019; Published: 22 March 2019Abstract: This paper analyses territorial resilience in rural Andalusia, Spain, after the impact ofthe recent economic crisis and identifies the factors associated with the highest recovery rates indifferent contexts and territories. To this end, we developed a methodology that incorporates theheterogeneity and diversity of rural territories and uses composite indices calculated using DataEnvelopment Analysis (DEA) in order to measure levels of resilience and identify the factors thatimpact recovery in rural counties. The results reveal how different aspects of economic, social, human,and natural capital promote resilient territorial dynamics in rural Andalusia. These results provideuseful information for political decision-makers in the design of public policies, especially at a timelike the present when the EU is immersed in debate on the reform of rural development policies forthe next programming period beyond 2020.Keywords: territorial resilience; economic crisis; resilience factors; rural territories; Andalusia;composite indices1. IntroductionIn the field of scientific disciplines, such as economics and political science, the most recentliterature does not hesitate to include the economic and financial crisis of 2007–2008 as one of the mainand most important events in the twenty-first century to date. Some authors describe the crisis as “thegreat recession”, and at a European level, it is regarded as the most severe defining moment since the1930s, the Second World War, and in the entire history of the European Union [1–3].What began as a financial and banking crisis stemming from the collapse of the housing bubbleand the over-expansion of credit in the United States quickly spread through the global financialsystem to hit real economies in much of Europe [4]. Indeed, even today most European economies arestill recovering from the consequences of the crisis, which was especially severe in terms of GDP andthe labour market [5,6].However, despite the widespread impact of the crisis in Europe, intensity and recovery rates havebeen very different [7]. Research on the different socio-spatial trajectories surrounding the crisis hasidentified a complex web of reactions and has revealed its disparate territorial effects [8,9]. Whereassome countries, such as Greece, Italy or Spain have suffered significant losses in terms of GDP andemployment, others, such as Germany and Poland, have maintained their levels of employment andeconomic growth [10].This situation highlights one of the most important consequences of the crisis: the increasein inequalities between European territories. Interregional differences in both GDP per capita andemployment decreased considerably during the period 2000–2007, stabilised in 2008, and clearlySustainability 2019, 11, 1743; doi:10.3390/su11061743 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilitySustainability 2019, 11, 1743 2 of 21reversed the trend from 2009 onwards [11]. Đokić et al. [12] highlight that previous research revealsthat periods of economic growth may be related to regional convergence, while periods of economicrecession may trigger regional divergences [13–15].These disparities are not only observed in analyses between countries but are also evident betweenregions and territories within countries themselves [16,17]. In the EU, the Spanish economy was oneof the most affected by the economic and financial crisis. During the crisis, the level of GDP andthe employment rate suffered significant falls in comparison to the EU average. This caused theconvergence path to stagnate in 2007 and to take a downward turn until 2013. The impact of the crisis,together with the effects of the austerity policies which were implemented as a consequence, hadimportant repercussions at a regional and territorial level. In this context, although every region inSpain suffered significantly from the crisis, there are important differences between them. In general,the regions with the highest levels of income and employment suffered the least from the effects of thecrisis. This has contributed to the increase in territorial disparities and has had a very negative impacton internal convergence processes [18].At an intraregional level, heterogeneous patterns have also been observed between territoriesand cities as a result of the crisis [19,20]. In Spain, one of the most affected regions was Andalusia,which tripled its unemployment rate during the period 2007–2013. This was exacerbated by the fall inaverage income per capita, the increase in long-term and youth unemployment, and cuts in public andprivate investment, inter alia. Moreover, not only has Andalusia been one of the most affected regionsin Spain, the crisis has also had an uneven impact across a large number of its territories [21], whichhas contributed to accentuating intraregional imbalances [22].The exceptional severity of the economic crisis and the spatial heterogeneity of its impact haveled to growing interest in recent years in the concept of resilience [23,24]. The term “resilience” iscommonly used in everyday language, as well as in various scientific disciplines. As such, there is alack of consensus on its definition and it has become subject to a variety of different meanings andconnotations [25–27]. Martin [28] states that resilience is not a unitary concept with a precise anduniversally accepted definition. In fact, according to several authors, the concept of resilience remainsdiffuse [29–32] and has acquired a polysemic nature [33]. However, all interpretations seem to convergein a shared meaning: the capacity to respond effectively to change; especially to unpredictable andsudden change [34].Despite criticism of the use of the term in regional studies [35,36], the number of publicationson regional resilience has increased significantly in recent years [32]. The term has attracted theattention of regional analysts, spatial economists, and economic geographers, who have used it in theirstudies as an analytical approach to try to understand the effects of the crisis from the perspectiveof unemployment [37], social exclusion [38,39], and the capacity of territories to resist the effects of aprolonged recession [21,28,31,40–43].The wide-range of studies on regional and territorial resilience differs according to the object ofstudy, the temporal and spatial scale on which the analysis is based, and the type of adverse event studied(sudden shock, long-term trend “slow-burn”, etc.). Most studies on regional resilience are eminentlyqualitative in nature, mainly because there is still no generally accepted methodology to measure regionalresilience, its determining factors, and its link with long-term regional growth patterns [24]. However,more research is being performed in the context of the economic crisis, based on different variables ofanalysis, time scales, and methodologies in an attempt to measure the resilience of different territoriesand to identify the explanatory factors that affect resilience. Studies of particular interest in the field arethose that perform a NUTS 2 scale analysis at a European [23,24,44–47] and domestic [18,48] level, thosethat use a NUTS 3 scale [10,12] analysis, and those that scale down to a Local Administrative Units (LAU)Local Administrative Units analysis in an urban environment [19,20,49].For rural areas, the concept of resilience has been applied to the analysis of complexsocio-ecological systems from the perspective of sustainable development [50–53], the analysisof community resilience [54–58], farming resilience [59–61], and the agri-food system and foodSustainability 2019, 11, 1743 3 of 21security [62–65]. However, this concept has not yet been widely used in a rural setting to try tounderstand the effects of the economic crisis from a territorial perspective.Studies that do approach the empirical analysis of resilience from a territorial perspective in arural environment have been performed by Sánchez-Zamora et al. [21,66]. The authors identify a seriesof factors linked to the early stages of resilience, such as preparation and the first response of territoriesafter the first initial shock. However, due to the moment in time in which the research was performed,the recovery stage and the identification of the factors that impact recovery were not considered.In order to advance in the study of this crucial stage of resilience, the authors highlight the need forfuture research to take into account the context in which the territories under study develop. In effect,the rural milieu is diverse, the potential methods of development are multiple, and the disparitiesbetween rural–rural territories are a reality. This diversity implies that there are no common stagesof development, that points of departure and arrival of development and resilience are potentiallydifferent, and that it is precisely these differences in a combination of different factors that mightexplain territorial success or failure [67].Although existing studies on territorial resilience contemplate a diversity of contexts, they oftenfail to incorporate this factor sufficiently in empirical analyses, which, on many occasions, has led tovery different types of territory being regarded as a homogeneous “whole”. The analysis of territorialresilience and its explanatory factors should, therefore, be performed between types of territories thatare more or less homogeneous in terms of their circumstances and resources.In this context, the objective of this study is to identify the factors associated with resilience indifferent types of rural territories in Andalusia. The aim is to provide useful information for the designof public policies that enable rural areas to adapt more adequately to the consequences of the economiccrisis. To this end, this research focuses on the analysis of the recovery stage of territorial resilience,i.e., the time interval following the impact of the crisis, which allows us to analyse the recovery capacityof territories after the shock to which they were subjected. The fact that the EU is currently immersedin the debate on the future of rural development policies for the next programming period beyond2020 further increases the interest of this research.In order to achieve the objective, following this introductory section, Section 2 describes thetheoretical and conceptual context of territorial resilience. Section 3 presents the geographical scope,the unit of analysis, and the selected time period, as well as the research methodology and stages.Section 4 presents and discusses the results. Lastly, Section 5 presents the main conclusions that can bedrawn from the study as a whole.2. Territorial Resilience2.1. From Regional Resilience to Territorial ResilienceIn the scientific literature, two approaches can be identified, which based on the study of complexsocio-ecological systems, are particularly relevant to the analysis of regional resilience [27,31,68]:(i) analysis via equilibrium, and (ii) analysis via complex adaptive systems. The former refers both to asystem’s capacity to return to its normal state of equilibrium once it has suffered a shock (“mechanicalresilience” in mono-equilibrium systems), and to its ability to tolerate shocks before changing itsstructure and moving to a new state of equilibrium (“ecological resilience” in multi-equilibriumsystems). The latter approach, complex adaptive systems, does not rely on equilibrium assumptionsbut alludes to the ongoing capacity of a system to continuously reconfigure itself, i.e., to adapt itsstructure and continuously develop over time.The framework proposed by studies in the field of socio-ecological systems and regional economyis, indisputably, an important methodological and conceptual reference model with which to addressthe analysis of resilience from a territorial perspective. Applied to a territory, in practice this ideabecomes two concepts. The first concept of resilience can be measured either as the capacity of a regionto withstand external pressures while maintaining its structural and functional attributes, or as theSustainability 2019, 11, 1743 4 of 21capacity of a territory to respond positively to external change. In such cases, a territory is said to have“static resilience” [69], which allows it either to return to a level of equilibrium, or to pass to anotherlevel of equilibrium [70–72].The second concept of resilience [73] can be defined as the ongoing capacity of a territory todevise and deploy new resources and capacities that allow it to adapt favourably to the dynamics oftransformation driven by the changing environment. In these cases, regions are said to have “dynamicresilience” [69] characterised by their capacity for adaptation and long-term learning in the face ofexternal or internal change [30,70–72].An operational perspective requires a broader vision in order for territorial resilience to go beyondboth concepts and be understood as the capacity of a territory to anticipate, prepare, respond, recover,and adapt to shock. Using this definition, four stages have been identified in the analysis of territorialresilience: (i) anticipation, preparation; (ii) response; (iii) recovery; and (iv) adaptation and long-termlearning [74]. As a result, this study is based on a temporal analysis, in which the stages are delimitedby the moment at which the shock or impact occurred. Moreover, although the trajectory followed bya territory in each of the stages may be a decisive factor in its level of resilience, in reality a territorycan only be regarded as resilient if it displays satisfactory behaviour in the recovery and the lateradaptation and long-term learning stage. As mentioned previously, this research focuses on theanalysis of resilience in the recovery stage.2.2. Factors Associated with Territorial ResilienceStudying territorial resilience involves not only analysing changes that occur in territorialorganisation as a consequence of shock, but also analysing territorial factors associated with different levelsof response and recovery. Previous studies reveal the complex and multidimensional nature of territorialresilience and the decisive influence that the availability of territorial resources and capital (economic,social, human, and natural) exert on resilience [10,75]. The territorial factors that have previously beenassociated with different levels of regional and territorial resilience are described below:• Economic capital includes factors such as employment and the labour market [76], level of income [10],innovation and entrepreneurship [45,77–79], economic structure [80], specialisation [16,81] anddiversification [45,82], economic dynamism [10], the importance of the agricultural and agri-foodsector [48,83], the financial, industrial and construction sectors [84], and tourism and the servicesector [10,37,48].• Social capital includes factors associated with public-private partnerships and their levels ofinteraction [85], institutional agreements, governance, investment in public services, citizenparticipation, political leadership [76,86–88], and the extent of regional association and cooperativenetworks [66,89].• Human capital includes factors such as demographic structure, population density, ageing andgenerational replacement [21,23], training and education [23,81,90,91], migratory movements [92],and access to basic services [10,93] and information and communication technology (ICT) [21].• Lastly, natural capital includes factors associated with territorial accessibility and connectivity [76,94],availability of natural resources [66], biodiversity [95], forest areas [96], and environmental qualityand invulnerability in relation to climate change [97].3. Methodology3.1. Research Scope, Unit of Analysis and Time ScaleWe selected the rural milieu of the Autonomous Region of Andalusia as the geographical areaof analysis for our study on territorial resilience. Andalusia is regarded as predominantly rural interms of surface area (although not population) and is located in a peripheral area in regard to bothSpain and the EU, being relatively distant from the main political and economic decision-makingcentres (Figure 1). It is characterised by its vast geographical expanse and economic diversity, the richSustainability 2019, 11, 1743 5 of 21biodiversity of its ecosystems, its good rural–urban demographic balance, the significant weight of theagri-food sector, and the presence of wide-ranging, heterogeneous association networks (cooperatives,trade unions, irrigation communities, professional organisations, Rural Development Groups, etc.). It isalso undergoing an intense rural development process owing to the implementation of the EU Leaderinitiative and the Spanish Proder programme (Nationwide programme for the economic developmentand diversification of rural areas through the implementation of the LEADER initiative) in 52 of itsterritorial units.Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 21 3. Methodology 3.1. Research Scope, Unit of Analysis and Time Scale We selected the rural milieu of the Autonomous Region of Andalusia as the geographical area of analysis for our study on territorial resilience. Andalusia is regarded as predominantly rural in terms of surface area (although not population) and is located in a peripheral area in regard to both Spain and the EU, being relatively distant from the main political and economic decision-making centres (Figure 1). It is characterised by its vast geographical expanse and economic diversity, the rich biodiversity of its ecosystems, its good rural–urban demographic balance, the significant weight of the agri-food sector, and the presence of wide-ranging, heterogeneous association networks (cooperatives, trade unions, irrigation communities, professional organisations, Rural Development Groups, etc.). It is also undergoing an intense rural development process owing to the implementation of the EU Leader initiative and the Spanish Proder programme (Nationwide programme for the economic development and diversification of rural areas through the implementation of the LEADER initiative) in 52 of its territorial units. However, as stated previously, Andalusia is also one of the regions hardest hit by the negative impact of the economic crisis. Alth ugh the impact of the recent economic and fin cial crisis was somewhat homogeneous at a European level, the sp cific characteristi s of Spain, and more recisely An alusia, made i  very different. The cri is i  And lu ia was not only financial and economic, but  structural, compl x and prolonged. Moreover, the crisis contributed decisively to generating high le ls of in quality betwe n diffe ent territor es an  sect rs of th  population. As a consequence, Andalusia has become the perfect esearc  laboratory in which to perform a terri orial resilience analysis.  Figure 1. Location of the research area in grey. We determined that the most suitable territorial unit of analysis to use in our study would be at a county level (LAU 1). The choice of counties as a unit of analysis is justified due to the growing expansion of local markets and the scope of rural policies. A county combines a set of natural, historical, social, economic, and legislative features which contribute to building the identity of a territory whose system of governance gives rise to a macro-micro synthesis, on which development processes are based. As a result, we analysed 52 of Andalusia’s counties, each managed by a Rural Development Group, which constitutes a large area of the overall territory (around 80%), including 698 municipalities and more than 3 million inhabitants. In order to analyse resilience and its explanatory factors, we have selected the period between 2012/2013–2016; years subsequent to the economic crisis (2008–2012), in which a large number of territories began to show diverse symptoms of recovery, reorganisation, and adaptation. ti f t .How v r, as stated previously, Andalusia is also one of the regions hardest hit by the negativeimpact of th economic crisis. Although the impact of the recent economic and financial crisis wassomewhat homogeneous at a Europ an level, the specific characteristics of Spai , and more preciselyAndalusia, made it very differe t. The crisis in Andalusia was not only financial and economic, but alsostructural, complex and prol nged. Moreover, th crisis contributed decisively t generating high levelsof in quality between differ nt territories and sect rs of the populatio . As a consequence, Andal siahas beco the perfect research laboratory in which t perf rm territorial resilie ce analysis.We determined that the most suitable territorial unit of analysis to use in our study would beat a county level (LAU 1). Th choice of counties as a unit f analysis is justifi due to the gro ingexpansion of local markets and the sc pe of rural policies. A county combines a set of n tural, historical,social, economic, and legislative features which contribute to building the identity of a territory whosesystem of governance gives rise to a macro-micro synthesis, on which development processes are based.As a result, we analysed 52 of Andalusia’s counties, each managed by a Rural Development Group,which constitutes a large area of the overall territory (around 80%), including 698 municipalities andmore than 3 million inhabitants.In order to analyse resilience and its explanatory factors, we have selected the period between2012/2013–2016; years subsequent to the economic crisis (2008–2012), in which a large number ofterritories began to show diverse symptoms of recovery, reorganisation, and adaptation.3.2. Research Methodology and StagesThe five stages of the methodology used to achieve the main objective and the statistical methodsinvolved in each are shown in Figure 2.Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 6 of 21Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 21 3.2. Research Methodology and Stages The five stages of the methodology used to achieve the main objective and the statistical methods involved in each are shown in Figure 2.  Figure 2. Research methodology. 3.2.1. Selection of Territorial Indicators Associated with Territorial Resilience The indicators used in the analysis are based on the literature review performed in Section 2.2, on factors previously associated with territorial resilience, which directly or indirectly reflect the characteristics of the territories analysed. The list of indicators was then classified under the four territorial capital indicators: economic, social, human, and natural capital. In order to compile the list, data from the years 2012/2013 and 2016 was collected from available statistical data published by official bodies (EUROSTAT, INE, SIMA, Anuario La Caixa, MAPA, Consejería de Agricultura de la Junta de Andalucía). Due to the scarcity of aggregated data at a county level, the indicators selected for the empirical analysis had to be compiled at municipality level then aggregated at the county level. Consequently, we collected data from the 698 municipalities that constitute the 52 rural counties analysed. Table 1 summarises the most significant characteristics of the 30 indicators that describe the territories finally selected. Table 1. Characteristic indicators of rural territories. Capital Variable Indicator Notation Definition Economic Employment Employment rate  EMPL Employed-to-active population ratio (100-unemployment rate) (%) Income Income per capita INCOME Level of income weighted by the total county population (€/pers)  Innovation and investment Business investment  INVEST Investment in the creation of new businesses (€/pers) Economic structure Economic diversification DIVER Based on the inverse of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI). Data corresponds to the number of new business and professional activities weighted by the population corresponding to the primary sectors, construction, industry and services (dimensionless) Figure 2. Research ethodology.3.2.1. Selection of Territorial Indicators Associated with Territorial ResilienceThe indicators used in the analysis are based on the literature review performed in Section 2.2,on factors previously associated with territorial resilience, which directly or indirectly reflect thecharacteristics of the territories analysed. The list of indicators was then classified under the fourterritorial capital indicators: economic, social, human, and natural capital. In order to compile thelist, data from the years 2012/2013 and 2016 was collected from available statistical data publishedby official bodies (EUROSTAT, INE, SIMA, Anu rio La Caixa, MAPA, Consejería e Agri ulturade la Junta de Andalucía). Due to the scarcity of aggregated data at a county level, the indicatorsselected for the empirical analysis had to be compiled at municipality level then aggregated at thecounty level. Consequently, we collected data from the 698 municipalities that constitute the 52 ruralcounties analysed.Table 1 summarises the most significant characteristics of the 30 indicators that describe heterritories finally selected.3.2.2. Determining the Typology of Rural TerritoriesThe typology of rural territories was determined based on the system of indicators shown inTable 1. Although the very act of creating a typology for analytical purposes reduces and simplifies areality that is much richer and more diverse, it offers the possibility to group similar territorial issuestogether and identify relatively homogeneous contexts in which to be able to deepen the analysisof resilience.In order to determi e a typology, after the selection and univariate analysis of the indicators,we performed a factor analysis (PCA procedure), and with the resulting factors, a cluster analysis(hierarchical aggregation procedure).Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 7 of 21Table 1. Characteristic indicators of rural territories.Capital Variable Indicator Notation DefinitionEconomicEmployment Employment rate EMPL Employed-to-active population ratio(100-unemployment rate) (%)Income Income per capita INCOME Level of income weighted by the total countypopulation (€/pers)Innovation andinvestmentBusinessinvestment INVESTInvestment in the creation of new businesses(€/pers)EconomicstructureEconomicdiversification DIVERBased on the inverse of theHerfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI). Datacorresponds to the number of new business andprofessional activities weighted by thepopulation corresponding to the primary sectors,construction, industry and services(dimensionless)EconomicdynamismEconomic activityindex EAITotal number of new business and professionalactivities weighted by population (dimensionless)AgriculturalsectorAgriculturalindex AGRINumber of new business and professionalactivities corresponding to agriculture, livestockfarming, and fishing weighted by population(dimensionless)Industrial sector Industrial index INDUSNumber of new business and professionalactivities corresponding to industrial activitiesweighted by population (dimensionless)ConstructionindustryConstructionindex CONSTNumber of new business and professionalactivities corresponding to constructionweighted by population (dimensionless)Service sector Service index SERVINumber of new business and professionalactivities corresponding to the service sectorweighted by population (dimensionless)SocialInvestment Expenditure vs.Income per capita EXPENPercentage of expenditure per capita versusincome per capita (%)Taxation Surplus SURPLUS Current budget surplus or deficit (€)ParticipationAverage voterturnout inelectionsPART Average percentage of votes in general, regional,and local elections per total voters (%)Partnership Private sectorparticipation PRIVPercentage of private members and businesseson the board of directors of Rural DevelopmentGroups (%)Associations Associationnetworks ASSOCNumber of sector and business associations,cooperatives and civic associations in the overallstructure of Rural Development Group (%)Cooperatives Cooperativenetworks COOPNumber of cooperatives per thousand totalpopulation (dimensionless)HumanDemographic Population POP Total population in county (pers)Density Populationdensity DENS Population per square kilometre (pers /km2).Generationalreplacement Youth index YOUTH Percentage of total population under 20 (%).Ageing Ageing index AGE Percentage of total population over 64 (%).PopulationattractionForeign-bornpopulation FBPWeight of foreign-born population versus totalpopulation (%).Education andtrainingUniversityeducation UNIPercentage of the population with universityeducation (%)Access to basicservicesLevel ofresources RESNumber of education and primary healthcarecentres per thousand total population(dimensionless)Connectivity Internetpenetration ADSLNumber of ADSL per thousand inhabitants(dimensionless)Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 8 of 21Table 1. Cont.Capital Variable Indicator Notation DefinitionNaturalRemoteness Distance DIST Distance from provincial capital (NUTS 3) (Km.)Isolation Altitude ALT Altitude above sea-level (m)Climate change Inverse CO2emissions CCBased on the inverse value of total CO2emissions (1/CO2 emissions) (1/Mt CO2equivalent)Biodiversity Natura 2000 NATUPercentage of surface-area designated as SpecialArea of Conservation (SAC) and SpecialProtection Area (SPA) versus total surface-area(%)Nature Forestsurface-area FORESTPercentage of surface-area covered by naturalvegetation and forests versus total surface-area(%)InvulnerabilitySurface-area withlow risk oferosionINVUL Percentage of surface-area with erosion levelsclassified as low or medium (%)Availability ofresourcesWaterdistribution WATERPercentage of region covered by reservoirs,marshland, salt flats, aquaculture, and rivers,streams and other wet lands versus totalsurface-area (%).3.2.3. Identifying Resilient Rural Territories in Each Type of TerritoryResilience processes of change were identified by creating a composite index, via DataEnvelopment Analysis (DEA), comprising variables to measure resilience. This approach enabled usto obtain a weighting system for the variables without resorting to the arbitrary assignment of weightsand without using methods based on the aggregation of the personal opinion of experts.Literature has already explored the utility of DEA in constructing sustainability indices at acompany level [98], to analyse changes over time in living conditions [99], to reappraise the UnitedNations Human Development Index [100–102], to create a rural municipalities socioeconomic potentialindex [103], to analyse rural territorial dynamics [21,66], and to analyse territorial cohesion [104]. Themodel proposed below is based on this literatureDEA is a technique initially designed by Charnes et al. [105] to calculate various measures ofefficiency in productive units, or more generically, decision making units (DMUs), via mathematicalprogramming. Traditionally, a DEA approach tries to compare the behaviour of a set of DMUs inrelation to the transformation of inputs into outputs, taking as a reference a production frontiercomposed of the best practices observed in the set. The basic theoretical framework that underlies DEAis a production function in which the following set k = 1, . . . , K of DMUs is assumed, which makesuse of an input vector x = (x1, . . . , xM) to produce an output vector y = (y1, . . . , yR). As a result, DEAdefines the efficiency of a decision making unit DMU0 by means of the maximum value of a ratio thattransforms its inputs into outputs:MaxurovmoR∑r=1uroyroM∑m=1vmoxmoSubject to:R∑r=1uroyrkM∑m=1vmoxmk≤ 1 k = 1, . . . , kuro ≥ 0 r = 1, . . . , Rumo ≥ 0 m = 1, . . . , M(1)Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 9 of 21Weights uro and uro represent the non-negative weights applied to output yro and input xmo, andare chosen with the aim of placing DMU0 in the most favourable light possible when comparedto others; in other words, they are calculated to maximize the corresponding efficiency ratio.Consequently, weights are unique to each unit and are selected to the best advantage of the DMUanalysed (in this case DMU0). This maximization is subject to several constraints, including thosethat establish that the efficiency ratios of the k decision making units, calculated with the very same,specific weighting vectors, must have an upper limit equal to the unit. Accordingly, a DMU0 will beconsidered efficient if a set of weights can be found such thatR∑r=1uroyro −M∑m=1vmoxmo ≥R∑r=1uroyrk −M∑m=1vmoxmk for all other UDk (2)This fractional optimisation problem can be expressed in linear form after performing theappropriate transformations (see Cooper et al. [106]), and also allowing the expression (1) to beused to evaluate the relative behaviour of a DMU. Our objective was to create a composite index basedon a set of variables that determine the classification of territories according to their resilient behaviour.In order to do so, and from a Multicriteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) perspective, a DEA analysis canbe integrated to a function that aggregates outputs and inputs into a single measure of value [107].The problem can be simplified by assuming a single input for each DMU and making it equal to theunit. Consequently, for DMU0, the following model is proposed:Maxµro h0 =R∑r=1µro IroSubject to:R∑r=1µro Irk ≤ 1 k = 1, . . . , Kµro ≥ 0 r = 1, . . . , R(3)where h0 is technical efficiency (in this case, territorial cohesion in the corresponding dimension) ofDMU0 (in this case, the territory being analysed); µro is the weight of indicator r, the most favourablefor the attributes of DMU0; and Irk represents the value of indicator r for DMUk. Note that it is nowused instead of as a reminder that we are no longer using outputs in our objective function, butmeasurable attributes or characteristics of the DMUs. Instead of measuring the efficiency of a DMU inthe input-output transformation, the objective function now involves obtaining the maximum value ofa composite index from a set of indicators corresponding to different aspects of territorial resilience.The following variables were selected for our study to measure resilient behaviour: employment,income, and population. All three are important development variables that are associated with themeasurement of citizen wellbeing and quality of life, as well as population retention in rural areas. In orderto measure the variables, the following three indicators were included in the model: (i) percentage increasein the employment rate during the period analysed (2012/2013–2016); (ii) percentage increase in netincome per capita during the period analysed; and (iii) percentage increase in the population during theperiod analysed. As a consequence, we argue that the dynamics of a territory can be considered resilientif during the period analysed it has been able to increase its level of employment, income per capita, andpopulation, or, depending on the context, to minimise losses.Specifically, a CCR model (named for Charnes, Cooper and Rhodes who initially proposed themodel in 1978. This model can have input or output orientation and operates under the assumption ofconstant returns to scale) was applied focusing on outputs and with a virtual input equal to the unit,which was calculated using Banxia Frontier Analyst software.Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 10 of 213.2.4. Identifying the Factors Associated with Territorial Resilience for Each Type of TerritoryOnce the resilience indices of each of the counties were estimated, the next step was to identifythe factors that might contribute to the processes of change in each type of rural territory. To this end,a correlation analysis (Spearman coefficient) was performed between the indicators characterising therural territory used to prepare the typologies and the corresponding resilience index. The aim was toidentify in each type of rural territory which explanatory factors or indicators (year 2012/2013) mightbe contributing to their recovery after the impact of the economic crisis (2012/13–2016).3.2.5. Analysis of Results and Implications for the Design of Public PoliciesLastly, a synthesis and critical analysis of the results obtained in each of the stages of themethodology was performed, and the possible implications that these may have for the designof public policies and strategies with an impact on rural territories was discussed.4. Results and DiscussionWhen determining the typology of rural territories, we used a factor analysis to reduce the original30 indicators to a total of 10 factors. These results are summarised in Appendix A.The factors are as follows:• Economic capital: Factor 1 represents employment and economic diversification, Factor 2 representsincome and economic dynamism, and Factor 3 represents innovation and entrepreneurship.• Social capital: Factor 4 represents the provision of public services, citizen participation andcooperative networks, and Factor 5 represents management.• Human capital: Factor 6 represents demographics and education, Factor 7 represents access toresources and basic services, and Factor 8 represents connectivity and access to the Internet.• Natural capital: Factor 9 represents biodiversity, forest areas and environmental quality, andFactor 10 represents invulnerability, remoteness and marginality.By using a cluster analysis based on the factors obtained we were able to identify four types ofrural territories. Figure 3 shows the resulting typology.Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 21 3.2.5. Analysis of Results and Implications for the Design of Public Policies Lastly, a synthesis and critical analysis of the results obtained in each of the stages of the methodology was performed, and the possible implications that these may have for the design of public pol cies and strategies with an impact on rural territories was di cussed. 4. Results and Discussion When determining the typology of rural territories, we used a factor analysis to reduce the original 30 indicators to a total of 10 factors. These results are summarised in Appendix A. The factors are as follows: • Economic capital: Factor 1 represents employment and economic diversification, Factor 2 represents income and economic dynamism, and Factor 3 represents innovation and entrepreneurship. • Social capital: Factor 4 represents the provision of public services, citizen participation and cooperative networks, and Factor 5 represents management. • Human capital: Factor 6 represents demographics and education, Factor 7 represents access to resources and basic services, and Factor 8 represents co nectivity and access to the Internet. • Natural capit l: Factor 9 rep sents biodiversity, forest areas and environmental quality, and Factor 10 represents invulnerability, remoteness and marginality. By using a cluster analysis based on the factors obtained we were able to identify four types of rural territories. Figure 3 shows the resulti g typology.  Figure 3. Typology of rural territories. We determined four types of rural territories based on their main characteristics: Types 1 and 2 represent peripheral, remote territories with deficient ICT infrastructures. They are generally located in mountainous areas that present important demographic problems of depopulation and ageing. They are primarily characterised by their valuable natural resources—extensive forest areas and protected natural spaces with rich biodiversity and important agri-environmental quality. The agricultural and livestock sector play an important role in the rural economy of these counties, as do the business and professional activities linked to commerce and rural tourism. Employment levels are above average. However, employment is often low-skilled given that the population usually has the lowest levels of education. People in these areas often have a strong sense of belonging and regional or local identity. These regions present the highest levels of citizen participation and number of cooperative networks, as well as greater implication from the private sector and professional and Figure 3. Typology of rural territories.Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 11 of 21We determined four types of rural territories based on their main characteristics: Types 1 and 2represent peripheral, remote territories with deficient ICT infrastructures. They are generally located inmountainous areas that present important demographic problems of depopulation and ageing. Theyare primarily characterised by their valuable natural resources—extensive forest areas and protectednatural spaces with rich biodiversity and important agri-environmental quality. The agricultural andlivestock sector play an important role in the rural economy of these counties, as do the businessand professional activities linked to commerce and rural tourism. Employment levels are aboveaverage. However, employment is often low-skilled given that the population usually has the lowestlevels of education. People in these areas often have a strong sense of belonging and regional or localidentity. These regions present the highest levels of citizen participation and number of cooperativenetworks, as well as greater implication from the private sector and professional and civic associationsin development processes. Type 1, which are closer to major centres of development and havebetter access to the Internet, have higher levels of employment, economic diversification, innovation,and entrepreneurship. In turn, Type 2, which are more peripheral and have greater problems ofdepopulation and ageing, present high levels of income per capita and are important areas for industry,primarily linked to the agri-food sector.Types 3 and 4 represent counties that due to their orography and more favourable geographicalsituation, located nearer to large urban centres and provincial capitals, present better infrastructures forconnecting and communicating with regional development centres. They have greater demographicpotential, and the highest levels of population density, young people with university education, andforeign-born populations. These counties do not usually have large forest areas or protected naturalparks but present the lowest levels of environmental quality. In addition to the agricultural andagri-food sectors, the industrial sector, and in particular, business and professional activities linked tothe service sector play a very important role in the rural economy of many counties. In general, countieswith higher population dynamics present lower levels of regional or local identity, citizen participation,cooperative networks, and management. Type 3, which are somewhat closer to provincial capitalsand coastal areas, present better connections, greater demographic potential, population attractionfor foreign-born citizens, and high levels of income per capita. They also present high levels ofentrepreneurship linked primarily to the service sector and tourism, two of the most important sectorsfor their economy and where a large number of professional activities are developed. However, theseareas also have the highest levels of unemployment. In turn, Type 4 rural territories are well connected,but somewhat further away from large urban centres. They are notable primarily for the importance oftheir agrarian, agri-food and industrial sectors, and the extensive network of cooperatives and SMEslinked to these activities.A synthetic territorial resilience index associated with each of the 52 counties was developed byapplying the DEA analysis in a differentiated way for each of the four types of rural territories. Table 2summarises the results obtained in the analysis in each of the four types of territories.The results show that seventeen counties (five belonging to Type 1, three to Type 2, five toType 3, and four to Type 4) present the most favourable situation (those with indices = 100) within thegeographical scope studied and from the perspective of the indicators selected to measure territorialresilience. These counties, the type of territory to which they belong, and their geographical locationare shown in Figure 4.Of the seventeen counties, Valle del Lecrín Temple and Costa Interior (Type 1), AndévaloOccidental (Type 2), Litoral de la Janda (Type 3), and Valle del Guadalhorce (Type 4) are thosewhich, within their type, most often constitute a control group for those counties which present anunfavourable situation or still have the capacity to improve (those with indices of <100). In otherwords, they act as a benchmark for counties in an unfavourable situation to measure improvement.The importance of identifying this group of counties lies in the fact that when comparing eachsubregion with its control group, we can determine the distance it must travel in each of the variablesSustainability 2019, 11, 1743 12 of 21contemplated in the analysis in order to reach the same situation of efficiency (or in this case resilience)enjoyed by the group.Table 2. Resilience indices of rural counties.Num. County RI Type1 Almanzora 95.3 Type 22 Alpujarra-Sierra Nevada Almeriense 67.72 Type 13 Filabres Alhamilla 100 Type 14 Levante Almeriense 100 Type 35 Los Vélez 100 Type 26 Campiña de Jerez 72.63 Type 37 Costa Noroeste de Cádiz 88 Type 38 Litoral de la Janda 100 Type 39 Los Alcornocales 100 Type 310 Sierra de Cádiz 99.31 Type 411 Campiña Sur 66.49 Type 412 Guadajoz y Campiña Este 91.15 Type 113 Los Pedroches 72.77 Type 214 Medio Guadalquivir 84.97 Type 315 Sierra Morena Cordobesa 86.21 Type 116 Subbética Cordobesa 50.7 Type 417 Valle del Alto Guadiato 57.08 Type 218 Alpujarra-Sierra Nevada de Granada 75.86 Type 119 Altiplano de Granada 71.89 Type 220 Arco Noroeste de la Vega de Granada 100 Type 121 Guadix 96.2 Type 122 Los Montes de Granada 100 Type 123 Poniente Granadino 92.93 Type 424 Valle Lecrín Temple y Costa Interior 100 Type 125 Vega Sierra-Elvira 91.47 Type 326 Andévalo Occidental 100 Type 227 Condado de Huelva 100 Type 328 Costa Occidental de Huelva 86.68 Type 329 Cuenca Minera de Riotinto 50 Type 230 Sierra de Aracena y Picos de Aro 90 Type 231 Campiña Norte de Jaén 50.85 Type 432 Condado de Jaén 66.83 Type 133 La Loma y las Villas 41.5 Type 434 Sierra de Cazorla 68.35 Type 135 Sierra de Segura 32.19 Type 236 Sierra Mágina 81 Type 137 Sierra Sur de Jaén 79.92 Type 438 Antequera 79.26 Type 439 Axarquía 97.49 Type 340 Guadalteba 99.46 Type 141 Serranía de Ronda 100 Type 242 Sierra de las Nieves 100 Type 143 Territorio Nororiental de Málaga 98.99 Type 444 Valle del Guadalhorce 100 Type 445 Aljarafe-Doñana 100 Type 346 Bajo Guadalquivir 100 Type 447 Campiña y los Alcores de Sevilla 100 Type 448 Corredor de la Plata 95.57 Type 149 Estepa Sierra Sur 100 Type 450 Gran Vega de Sevilla 89.1 Type 351 Serranía Suroeste Sevillana 90.98 Type 452 Sierra Morena Sevillana 84.01 Type 1Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 13 of 21Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 21 24 Valle Lecrín Temple y Costa Interior 100 Type 1 25 Vega Sierra-Elvira 91.47 Type 3 26 Andévalo Occidental 100 Type 2 27 Condado de Huelva 100 Type 3 28 Costa Occidental de Huelva  86.68 Type 3 29 Cuenca Minera de Riotinto 50 Type 2 30 Sierra de Aracena y Picos de Aro 90 Type 2 31 Campiña Norte de Jaén 50.85 Type 4 32 Condado de Jaén 66.83 Type 1 33 La Loma y las Villas 41.5 Type 4 34 Sierra de Cazorla 68.35 Type 1 35 Sierra de Segura 32.19 Type 2 36 Sierra Mágina 81 Type 1 37 Sierra Sur de Jaén 79.92 Type 4 38 Antequera 79.26 Type 4 39 Axarquía 97.49 Type 3 40 Guadalteba 99.46 Type 1 41 Serranía de Ronda 100 Type 2 42 Sierra de las Nieves 100 Type 1 43 Territorio Nororiental de Málaga 98.99 Type 4 44 Valle del Guadalhorce 100 Type 4 45 Aljarafe-Doñana 100 Type 3 46 Bajo Guadalquivir 100 Type 4 47 Campiña y los Alcores de Sevilla 100 Type 4 48 Corredor de la Plata 95.57 Type 1 49 Estepa Sierra Sur 100 Type 4 50 Gran Vega de Sevilla 89.1 Type 3 51 Serranía Suroeste Sevillana 90.98 Type 4 52 Sierra Morena Sevillana 84.01 Type 1 The results show that seventeen counties (five belonging to Type 1, three to Type 2, five to Type 3, and four to Type 4) present the most favourable situation (those with indices = 100) within the geographical scope studied and from the perspective of the indicators selected to measure territorial resilience. These counties, the type of territory to which they belong, and their geographical location are shown in Figure 4.  Figure 4. Location of resilient counties. Figure 4. Location of resilient counties.Table 3 shows the results obtained in relation to the correlation analysis performed betweenthe indicators describing rural territories and the corresponding resilience index of the counties thatconstitute each type of territory.Table 3. Correlation indices by type of territory.Dimension/IndicatorResilience IndicesSpearman CoefficientType 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4Economic CapitalDIVER 0.617 (**)AGRI 0.674 (**) 0.491 (*)SERVI 0.595 (*)Social CapitalEXPEN 0.544 (*)PRIV 0.447 (*)ASSOC 0.595 (*)Human CapitalYOUTH 0.493 (*) 0.593 (*)AGE −0.598 (*)FBP 0.580 (*)UNI 0.463 (*)ADSL 0.537 (*)Natural CapitalDIST −0.544 (*)FOREST 0.560 (*)Note: ** The correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed); * the correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 14 of 21In Type 1, the results show significant correlations between the resilience index and variousindicators associated with different aspects of territorial capital. In economic capital, the diversificationfactor (DIVER) has been decisive in the development of rural subregional economies. Despite thelimitations derived from orography, mountainous territories that have diversified their economicand professional activities, which are usually based on the potential of their valuable natural andcultural resources, achieve the highest levels of resilience. In social capital, the results show a positivecorrelation between the resilience index and the involvement of the private sector in the developmentof counties (PRIV). The best levels of development have been achieved in those counties wherenew activities have been undertaken and have been developed or supported by private initiatives.In human capital, the results show positive correlations between the resilience index and the presenceof young people (YOUTH), and between young people and high levels of education (UNI). These twofactors are of vital importance for the development of this type of territory, given that their physicalconditions present important demographic problems. The growing attraction of these territories asplaces of second residence or even main residence for those who have found a permanent place inwhich to live and work has been a creative way of reactivating and promoting the development of somecounties in the rural interior after the impact of the economic crisis. Lastly, in natural capital, anotherdetermining factor is geographical enclave and the distance of counties to the main focuses of economicdevelopment in the region (DIST). Those counties closest to provincial capitals have been benefited bythe rural-urban exchange, which, in some cases, has contributed to reducing traditional isolation.In Type 2, the results show significant correlation between the resilience index and two territorialindicators, economic capital and social capital. The former represents greater activity in the servicesector (SERVI). Levels of resilience are higher in those territories within this group which have animportant agri-food sector, as well as economic and professional service sector activities linked toagriculture and livestock farming. In turn, the latter represents the number of associations that exist ina territory (ASSOC). The territories in this type are notable for citizen participation and the involvementof sectorial, business, cooperative, and civic associations in territorial development processes. As such,in times of economic crisis, those regions in which associations have a greater presence have achievedgreater levels of territorial resilience.In Type 3, the results show significant correlation between the resilience index and variousindicators associated with different types of territorial capital. In economic capital, a positive correlationcan be observed between the agricultural index (AGRI) and territorial resilience. Although the primarysector in these territories was never the most important, it became strategic in the context of theeconomic crisis. During periods of economic prosperity, one of the most prosperous sectors wasconstruction. However, once the housing bubble burst, the destruction of employment in this sectorwas relentless, and agriculture became a refuge sector capable of absorbing much of the unemploymentgenerated. In social capital, the results show a positive correlation between the resilience index andpublic spending (EXPEN). The counties where public institutions and local councils have investeda greater percentage of their budget in improving public services have reached higher levels ofresilience. In human capital, the results show that both the foreign-born population (FBP) and thelevel of connectivity and Internet penetration (ADSL) are determining factors in the resilience of ruralterritories. Current technological advances in communication have opened new ways to reinforce theviability of these areas, to intensify even more their relationship with the nearest urban centres, and toincrease the population attraction for the settlement of native and foreign-born citizens. In naturalcapital, a factor that has also been a determinant is forest areas (FOREST). In the type of territorywhere tourism is important, those with the greatest availability of natural resources are those that haveproved to be most resilient to the impact of the economic crisis.Lastly, in Type 4, the results show significant correlation between the resilience index and threeterritorial indicators, one for economic capital and two for human capital. The former represents theagricultural sector (AGRI). Although the agricultural and agri-food sector in most territories is alreadyof vital importance, the results indicate that in the context of economic crisis, agriculture plays anSustainability 2019, 11, 1743 15 of 21essential role in sustaining rural economies, and is regarded as one of the elements to be consideredin territorial change and resilience processes. The other two indicators represent the demographicstructure, both the percentage of young people (YOUNG) and the percentage of the ageing population(AGE). The resilience index is positively correlated with the former and negatively correlated with thelatter. It should be understood that the presence of a young population, which has an important rolein generational replacement and continuity, territorial dynamics, greater capacity to adapt to change,and greater awareness towards innovation and the incorporation of new technologies, is a significantfactor in the promotion of resilient territorial dynamics.5. ConclusionsThis study has made progress in the conceptualisation, evaluation and measurement of territorialresilience in different types of rural territories in Andalusia, as well as in the identification of thefactors associated with resilience in each. However, this exercise has not been simple from a theoreticaland methodological perspective. The difficulty involved in adopting the conceptual framework ofresilience for its application in the analysis of territories and their processes of change highlights theimmense theoretical layers yet to be explored. In turn, it is also important to recognise that the ruralmilieu is heterogeneous and diverse, and the factors that intervene in the processes of change arecomplex and varied, as are the relationships established between them.However, despite the difficulties, we were able to advance in the conceptualisation of territorialresilience, and in particular, design a methodology to approach the empirical analysis of the factorsthat affect resilience in the diversity and heterogeneity of rural territories in a differentiated way.This methodology presents practical usefulness, application possibilities, and enables the extraction ofa series of conclusions:1. It presents an integrated view of territorial resilience and its explanatory factors, taking intoaccount economic, social, human, and natural dimensions. No attempt has been made to performan exhaustive analysis for each of these dimensions, given that other more specific methodologyexists for this purpose. However, they have been dealt with in the integrated and holistic wayrequired of territorial analyses.2. It is based on a territorial approach, insofar as the methodology is adapted specifically to eachterritory, which it takes as a unit of analysis, and regards rural counties as basic managementunits on which rural policies have an impact.3. It is based on a careful selection of indicators that characterise territorial resilience and itsexplanatory factors, performed on the basis of a conceptual reference framework and criteriaof reliability (official sources of data) and applicability (operative costs calculation is based ondata sources). In turn, the availability of the statistical data used in the methodology guaranteesautomatic follow-up on the evolution of the indicators.4. The analysis of territorial resilience through the proposed methodology can be considered apotentially useful tool to provide information to political decision-makers in charge of the designand implementation of public policies.5. Although the results obtained in this study cannot be generalised beyond the scope of Andalusia,the proposed methodology can be extrapolated for the analysis of other territories.6. It should be highlighted that the methodological tools used to measure territorial cohesion (DEA)only provide relative, not absolute, results, given that territories are classified and hierarchizedby comparing them to each other.The methodology used in our study has provided results that lead us to conclude that the mainfactors that have driven resilient territorial dynamics in rural Andalusia are: (i) the diversification ofthe rural economy; (ii) the professional and business activities developed around the agrarian andagri-food sector; (iii) the availability of services relating to commerce, tourism, catering, transport andcommunication, financial institutions, etc.; (iv) budgetary expenditure and the provision of public goodsSustainability 2019, 11, 1743 16 of 21and services by the competent authorities; (v) public institutional capacity and management, privateinitiative and partnerships between associations and Rural Development Groups; (vi) availability of, andaccess to, ICT; (vii) demographic potential, young people and education; and (viii) biodiversity, forestareas and environmental quality.From these results, the following elements of analysis and implications and proposals can beextracted for the design of policies with an impact on rural territories:1. Diverse rural realities require flexible policies that enable the correct use of the principleof subsidiarity.2. This flexibility implies the need for objectives and measures adapted to different realities andprioritised in a variety of ways. This will enable rural territories to progress by acting onthe issues that affect them directly and focusing on the factors that might have an impact ontheir development.3. Although public policies with an impact on these territories recognise the diversity of rural areas,this recognition has not been sufficiently transferred to the planning of objectives and the designof measures.4. Public policies should recognise the uniqueness of rural territories and establish the correspondingdiagnosis to encourage the most appropriate policies and measures to promote development.5. The development of rural territories depends on factors that are linked to the scope of diversepublic policies (rural, agricultural, territorial). This implies the need for comprehensive andcomplementarity policies, as well as coordination of funding.Lastly, it is important to highlight that this study analyses the third stage of territorial resilience,“a territory’s capacity to recover from shock”. For future study, it would be interesting to deepen theanalysis of the last stage of resilience once a longer period of time has passed since the economic crisis,“a territory’s capacity for adaptation and long-term learning”, in order to try to validate and contrastthe results obtained in this study.Author Contributions: The authors contributed equally to this work.Funding: This research has been developed in the context of the “El medio rural andaluz frente a la crisiseconómica: dinámicas territoriales, factores de resiliencia y estrategias de adaptación” project (Ref: 150/17)funded by the Fundación Pública Andaluza Centro de Estudios Andaluces (X Call for Research Projects 2017).Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 17 of 21Appendix ATable A1. Results of factorial analyses.IndicatorsTerritorial CapitalEconomic Social Human NaturalFactorsF1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 F7 F8 F9 F10Loaded FactorsEMPL 0.750DIVER 0.714AGRI 0.779INDUS 0.805CONST 0.835INCOME 0.538EAI 0.901SERVI 0.794INVEST 0.976EXPEN 0.839PART 0.679COOP 0.647SURPLUS −0.843PRIV 0.815ASSOC 0.588POP 0.891DENS 0.846YOUTH 0.733UNI 0.723AGE 0.505RES 0.937FBP 0.408ADSL 0.966FOREST 0.859NATU 0.744CC 0.612DIST 0.514ALT 0.815WATER −0.822INVUL −0.555% variance 31,409 23.153 20.381 40.036 18.304 60.977 16.129 8.813 33.844 23.213% accumulated variance 31.409 54.562 74.943 40.036 58.34 60.977 77.107 85.920 33.844 57.057StatisticsKMO: 0.508 KMO: 0.614 KMO: 0.817 KMO: 0.607Bartlett: 16.165 Bartlett: 72.375 Bartlett: 281.382 Bartlett: 78.838Sig. 0.095 Sig. 0.000 Sig. 0.000 Sig. 0.000References1. European Commission. Economic crisis in Europe: Causes, consequences and responses. In EuropeanEconomy, 7; European Commission: Luxembourg, 2009.2. Capello, R.; Caragliu, A. After crisis scenarios for Europe: Alternative evolutions of structural adjustments.Camb. J. Reg. Econ. Soc. 2016, 9, 81–101. [CrossRef]3. Webber, D.J.; Healy, A.; Bristow, G. Regional growth paths and resilience: A European analysis. Econ. Geogr.2018, 94, 355–375. [CrossRef]4. Cuadrado-Roura, J.R.; Martin, R.; Rodríguez-Pose, A. The economic crisis in Europe: Urban and regionalconsequences. Camb. J. Reg. Econ. Soc. 2016, 9, 3–11. [CrossRef]5. Fingleton, B.; Garretsen, H.; Martin, R. Shocking aspects of monetary union: The vulnerability of regions inEuroland. J. Econ. Geogr. 2015, 15, 907–934. [CrossRef]6. Fratesi, U.; Rodríguez-Pose, A. The crisis and regional employment in Europe: What role for shelteredeconomies? Camb. J. Reg. Econ. Soc. 2016, 9, 33–57. [CrossRef]7. Christopherson, S.; Clark, G.L.; Whiteman, J. Introduction: The Euro crisis and the future of Europe. J. Econ.Geogr. 2015, 15, 843–853. [CrossRef]8. Hadjimichalis, C.; Hudson, R. Contemporary crisis across Europe and the crisis in regional developmenttheories. Reg. Stud. 2014, 48, 208–218. [CrossRef]Sustainability 2019, 11, 1743 18 of 219. Sensier, M.; Bristow, G.I.; Healy, A. Measuring regional economic resilience across Europe: Operationalizinga complex concept. Spat. Econ. Anal. 2016, 11, 128–151. [CrossRef]10. Fratesi, U.; Perucca, G. Territorial capital and the resilience of European regions. Ann. Reg. Sci. 2018, 60,241–264. [CrossRef]11. European Commission. The urban and regional dimension of the crisis. In 8th Progress Report on Economic,Social and Territorial Cohesion; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2013.12. Đokić, I.; Fröhlich, Z.; Rašić-Bakarić, I. The impact of the economic crisis on regional disparities in Croatia.Camb. J. Reg. Econ. Soc. 2016, 9, 179–195. [CrossRef]13. Dunford, M.; Perron, D. Regional inequality, regimes of accumulation and economic development incontemporary Europe. Trans. Inst. Br. Geogr. 1994, 19, 163–182. [CrossRef]14. Evans, P.; McCormic, B. The new pattern of regional unemployment: Causes and policy significance. Econ. J.1994, 104, 633–647. [CrossRef]15. Dunford, M.; Smith, A. Catching up or falling behind? Economic performance and regional trajectories inthe “New Europe”. Econ. Geogr. 2009, 76, 169–195. [CrossRef]16. Groot, S.P.T.; Mohlmann, J.L.; Garretsen, J.H.; de Groot, H.L.F. The crisis sensitivity of European countriesand regions: Stylized facts and spatial heterogeneity. Camb. J. Reg. Econ. Soc. 2011, 4, 437–456. [CrossRef]17. Capello, R.; Caragliu, A.; Fratesi, U. Spatial heterogeneity in the costs of the economic crisis in Europe: Arecities sources of regional resilience? J. Econ. Geogr. 2015, 15, 951–972. [CrossRef]18. Cuadrado-Roura, J.R.; Maroto, A. Unbalanced regional resilience to the economic crisis in Spain: A tale ofspecialization and productivity. Camb. J. Reg. Econ. Soc. 2016, 9, 153–178. [CrossRef]19. Lee, N. Grim down South? The determinants of unemployment increases in British cities in the 2008–2009recession. Reg. Stud. 2014, 48, 1761–1778. [CrossR