Immigrant Men's Economic Adaptation in Changing Labor Markets: Why Gaps between Turkish and German Men Expanded, 1976-2015

www.ssoar.infoImmigrant Men's Economic Adaptation in ChangingLabor Markets: Why Gaps between Turkish andGerman Men Expanded, 1976-2015Wiedner, Jonas; Giesecke, JohannesVeröffentlichungsversion / Published VersionZeitschriftenartikel / journal articleEmpfohlene Zitierung / Suggested Citation:Wiedner, J., & Giesecke, J. (2022). Immigrant Men's Economic Adaptation in Changing Labor Markets: Why Gapsbetween Turkish and German Men Expanded, 1976-2015. International Migration Review, 56(1), 176-205. https://doi.org/10.1177/01979183211029903Nutzungsbedingungen:Dieser Text wird unter einer CC BY-NC Lizenz (Namensnennung-Nicht-kommerziell) zur Verfügung gestellt. Nähere Auskünfte zuden CC-Lizenzen finden Sie hier:https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/deed.deTerms of use:This document is made available under a CC BY-NC Licence(Attribution-NonCommercial). For more Information see:https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0Diese Version ist zitierbar unter / This version is citable under:https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-84659-8Immigrant Men’sEconomic Adaptation inChanging Labor Markets:Why Gaps betweenTurkish and German MenExpanded, 1976–2015Jonas WiednerWZBJohannes GieseckeHumboldt University of BerlinAbstractHow important were manufacturing and heavy industries to the economic inte-gration of twentieth-century immigrants in Western societies? This article examineshow macro-social change in Germany since the height of manufacturing has affectedthe socio-economic integration of male immigrants. We develop an analyticalframework to assess how educational expansion among natives, deindustrialization,and the increasing importance of formal qualifications shape male immigrant-nativegaps in labor-market outcomes over time. Empirically, we focus on first-generationmale Turkish immigrants in Germany and use micro-census data spanning almost40 years. Through a novel empirical quantification of key theoretical argumentsconcerning immigrant economic integration, we find growing inter-group differencesbetween the late 1970s and mid-2000s (employment) and mid-2010s (incomes),respectively. The growth of differences between the immigrant and native incomedistributions was most pronounced in their respective bottom halves. Our analysisshows that these trends are linked to the increased importance of formalCorresponding Author:Jonas Wiedner, WZB Berlin Social Science Center, Reichpietschufer 50, Berlin 10785, Germany.Email: wiedner@wzb.euInternational Migration Reviewª The Author(s) 2021Article reuse guidelines:sagepub.com/journals-permissionsDOI: 10.1177/01979183211029903journals.sagepub.com/home/mrx2022, Vol. 56(1) 176–205International Migration, Economic Mobility, and Migrant Vulnerabilitieseducational qualifications for individual labor-market success, to educationalexpansion in Germany, and to deindustrialization. Employment in Germany shiftedaway from middling positions in manufacturing, but while natives tended to moveinto better-paying positions, Turkish immigrants mainly shifted into disadvantagedservice jobs. These results provide novel evidence for claims that the economicassimilation of less-skilled immigrants may become structurally harder in increasinglypost-industrial societies. We conclude that structural change in host countries is animportant, yet often overlooked, driver of immigrant socio-economic integrationtrajectories.Keywordseconomic integration, labor market change, decomposition analysisIntroductionUntil the 1970s, industry, manufacturing, and heavy industries composed the singlelargest sector of employment in Germany and in other European and NorthAmerican countries (e.g., Oesch 2013). Proponents of different models of immigrantadaptation agree that this economic environment played a central role forlower-skilled immigrants’ economic integration, particularly in the United States,during the middle of the last century (Portes and Rumbaut 2001; Alba and Nee2003). An open question in scholarship on immigrant integration remains, however,as to what degree historical patterns of assimilation during the twentieth centurydepended on the unique set of favorable structural conditions brought about by thecentrality of manufacturing (Perlmann 2005; Waldinger 2007). More importantly,there is no consensus as to whether similar adaptation outcomes can be expected inmodern economies that revolve around services and put a higher premium on skill(Portes, Fernández-Kelly, and Haller 2009).The research question pursued in this article is, therefore, what implicationsde-industrialization, shifting skill demand, and educational expansion since theheight of the manufacturing economy in the second half of the twentieth centuryhad for (lower-skilled) immigrants’ economic attainment. The pessimistic answer tothis question, often associated with proponents of segmented assimilation theory, isthat economic adaptation becomes harder for less-skilled immigrants in modernservice-oriented economies (Gans 1992; Zhou 1997). Proponents of mainstreamassimilation models, by contrast, expect that mid-twentieth-century immigrants’experience will be repeated by more recent cohorts of newcomers (Alba and Nee2003). In spite of this question’s relevance for understanding the perspective currentimmigrants face, there are few direct empirical tests of what role longer-termde-industrialization and educational upgrading play in lower-skilled immigrants’177Wiedner and Gieseckelabor market attainment (c.f., Reitz 2001; Lubotsky 2011; Moreno-Galbis et al.2019). This article aims to fill that important gap.Drawing on official microcensus data from the 1970s to the mid-2010s, weprovide a detailed empirical assessment of the implications of de-industrialization,shifting skill demand, and educational expansion for lower-skilled immigrants,using first-generation male Turkish immigrants in (West) Germany as our testcase. Concretely, we analyze historical time trends in male first-generation Turk-ish immigrants’ relative incomes and employment probabilities in West Germanybetween 1976, when the structural changes we describe started to unfold, and2015, when a service-centered economy had been firmly established. To quantifythe respective contributions of different facets of macro-structural change, we relyon a longitudinal decomposition approach. Our methodology provides empiricalestimates of the importance of German educational expansion, of the growingimportance of qualifications, and of de-industrialization for immigrants’ socio-economic adaptation at different points of their income distribution and for theirprobability of employment.This article contributes an empirical assessment of host-country macro-structuraldrivers of changes in immigrant-native differentials to the literature on immigranteconomic attainment. It constitutes an important advance over previous studies onlonger-term trends in immigrant economic attainment, which are often largelydescriptive (e.g., Bevelander 2001; Gustafsson and Zheng 2006; Rosholm, Scott,and Husted 2006; Dustmann, Glitz, and Vogel 2010) or employ statisticalapproaches that obstruct conclusions about the role of structural change in receivingcontexts (Borjas 1994; Kalter 2002). Focusing on Turks in Germany, we add to theliterature that seeks to explain trends in immigrant-native differences in structuralterms (Reitz 2001; Lubotsky 2011; Moreno-Galbis et al. 2019) and provide the firstassessment of drivers of longer-term trends in the integration of a large guest-workergroup. Our analysis considers heterogeneous developments along the distributionof incomes and provides simulation-based estimates of the effects of endogenoussample selection that have often gone unaddressed in previous work.In the next section, we review the available evidence on longer-term trends inimmigrant economic integration in (post-)industrial countries. Drawing on moregeneral labor-market scholarship, we, then, identify three arguments about whyimmigrant-native differentials are likely to grow as employment shifts from man-ufacturing to services. In the third section, we introduce the data and decomposi-tion approach we use to quantify the importance of the three different arguments.The fourth section presents the results of our analysis. We start with a descriptivepresentation of immigrant men’s relative employment and income trends and thenanalyze how educational expansion, de-industrialization, and the increasingimportance of formal qualifications have contributed to growing gaps in Germany.In the fifth section, we summarize our findings and discuss their implications forscholarship and policy.International Migration Review 56(1)178Technological Change and Labor-market RestructuringShape Immigrant Economic AdaptationOur principal concern is whether relatively equitable economic integration oflower-skilled immigrants has become structurally harder since the middle of thelast century. Traditional “straight-line” models of immigrant assimilation predict theuniform blending of groups of initially disadvantaged newcomers into the nativemainstream through upward mobility (Gordon 1964). However, as growing incomeinequality in post-industrial receiving societies became apparent, scholars of immi-grant integration started to reject some of the optimism of conventional assimilationmodels (e.g., Portes and Rumbaut 2001). They argued that newcomers’ historicaladjustment to native levels of income and occupational attainment was only possiblein an economic environment marked by plentiful blue-collar factory jobs that offereddecent wages and predictable avenues to upward mobility: past immigrant upwardmobility was in part due to “manufacturing exceptionalism” (Gans 1992; Portes andZhou 1993; Zhou 1997). An important implication of this hypothesis is thatmid-twentieth-century immigrants’ experiences of relatively successful economicintegration are less likely to be repeated today (Portes, Fernández-Kelly, and Haller2009; c.f., Waldinger [2007] and Alba, Kasinitz, and Waters [2011] for contrastingassessments).In the following, we review existing empirical studies for evidence as to whetherbroad trends in immigrant attainment over historical time are compatible with thisargument. Since few studies provide an account of the different mechanism at play,we, then, review explanations for rising inequality more generally to identify threehistorical forces that should come with negative implications for lower-skilledimmigrants: native educational expansion, growing importance of educational qua-lifications, and de-industrialization.De-industrialization and Immigrants’ Economic AdaptationHas immigrants’ economic attainment become harder in a service-centered econ-omy? Unfortunately, prominent studies of historical trends in immigrant economicadaptation do not allow inference about the role of historical labor-market change inthese trends. In a widely cited paper, Borjas (1994) provides econometric analyses ofthe growing immigrant wage gap in the United States. Because his analyses con-centrate on changes in immigrant composition, Borjas’ estimates are deflated forchanges in the labor-market returns to human capital. It is exactly this latter dimen-sion, however, that is indicative of the kind of structural change at stake in thecontroversy on the role of manufacturing. Similarly, Kalter and Granato (2002)report historical trends of increasing “net assimilation” of immigrants to Germany.This finding might be taken to indicate a minor role of de-industrialization forintegration trends. However, because their estimates are (like those of Borjas)179Wiedner and Gieseckestatistically purged of the effects of labor-market change, such inference is impos-sible. These studies, thus, do not allow conclusions about structural change’s inde-pendent role for immigrants’ changing prospects.More informative are analyses that, among other results, provide descriptiveassessments of immigrant labor-market outcomes over time. Such studies, mostlyfrom Scandinavian countries, report growing unemployment risks and falling rela-tive earnings for non-western immigrants between the 1970s and the 1990s(Bevelander 1999, 2001; Bevelander and Nielsen 2001; Blom 2004; Gustafsson andZheng 2006; Rosholm, Scott, and Husted 2006). Similarly, Herwig and Konietzka’sanalysis of immigrants’ class attainment (2012) shows that in Germany, Turkishimmigrants’ access to higher class positions deteriorated relative to natives betweenthe 1970s and 2000s, while Dustmann, Glitz, and Vogel (2010) document increasingunemployment rates and wage differentials between Germans and immigrants since1980, which are somewhat attenuated when controls for education are introduced.Results of these studies are consistent with the conjecture of mainstream assimila-tion theory’s critics that sectoral restructuring has resulted in growingimmigrant-native differences (Gans 1992; Zhou 1997). However, these studies donot directly test de-industrialization’s role in immigrants’ changing prospects and,hence, afford only limited insights into why economic gaps between the immigrantand native populations have changed.Evidence on this question of the effects of labor-market change on the evolutionof immigrant-native differentials exists only for Canada (Reitz 2001), France(Moreno-Galbis et al. 2019), and the United States (Lubotsky 2011). The resultsof Reitz (2001) and Lubotsky (2011) suggest that structural change in the liberalmarket economies they studied has turned against immigrants. The factors thatexplain the dynamic of immigrant-native gaps in economic outcomes identified byReitz (2001) in Canada include native educational expansion and an increasingdiscounting of foreign education. Lubotsky’s (2011) results document clearlythat changes in the US wage structure linked to the growth of overall inequalityhave made earnings assimilation harder for more recent immigrants. Nevertheless,given the exceptional extent of increases in income inequality in the United States,it is unclear whether these findings also apply to less unequal societies. Suchdoubts are reinforced by Moreno-Galbis et al. (2019), who document thatlabor-market change since the mid-1990s — however long after the onset ofthe manufacturing economy’s demise — has benefited recent immigrants to(low-inequality) France.In sum, then, available evidence on trends in immigrant-native gaps in economicoutcomes is largely compatible with the manufacturing exceptionalism thesis. How-ever, very few studies attempt explanatory decompositions of such trends, and theirresults are not entirely consistent. In the following, we aim to provide an assessmentof the drivers of immigrant-native gaps. To identify the relevant mechanisms, we180 International Migration Review 56(1)review some of the insights social scientists have produced about rising inequalitygenerally and then discuss their implications for immigrants.Growing Skill Demand and Educational ExpansionA prominent group of explanations for the growth of income inequality in developedcountries argues that changing technologies alter the relative demand for differentkinds of labor (Katz and Murphy 1992). According to this argument, technologicalchange has led market forces to shift against lower- and medium-skilled workers inmodern economies (for a review, see Acemoglu and Autor 2011). Proponents of theskill-biased technological change (SBTC) hypothesis argue that recent technologicalinnovations have increased higher-skilled workers’ productivity while simplyreplacing lower-skilled jobs (Katz and Murphy 1992).While technological change affects the relative demand for skill, the relativesupply of skill is mostly determined by the education system (Goldin and Katz2009). Thus, labor-market equilibria could stay dynamically stable if educationalexpansion advances at the same rate as relative skill demand. In this case, returns toeducation would not change, although the average education among workers wouldincrease. Empirical analyses show that this situation can, to some degree, be found inmany European countries (Nolan et al. 2014). In Germany, the overall wage premiato education stayed relatively stable, at least until the mid-2000s, as tertiary educa-tion has expanded significantly (Boockmann and Steiner 2006; see also Sections B.1and B.2 of the Online Appendix). However, at the same time, the prospects fordropouts and for workers without vocational training have continuously decreased.Studies show that the demand for untrained workers in Germany has decreased morerapidly than the number of such workers (Dustmann, Ludsteck, and Schönberg 2009;Giesecke, Heisig, and Solga 2015). As a result, relative wages and employmentprospects for lower-skilled workers have decreased, suggesting that negative effectsof changing skill demand have been felt most harshly at the bottom of the incomestructure.What does this development entail for (less-skilled) immigrant groups? As a firstapproximation, less-skilled immigrants can be expected to share the experience oflower-skilled workers generally. The growing importance of formal qualificationsshould, therefore, result in increasing stratification between immigrants and nativesto the degree that human-capital differentials correlate with immigrant status. Such aprocess is in line with the pessimistic perspective in segmented assimilation theory(Gans 1992; Zhou 1997). Technological change affects all less-skilled workers, butdue to the higher prevalence of this group among immigrants, its consequences areheightened for immigrants. We, thus, propose the first dimension of structuralchange that may have carried negative implications for lower-skill immigrantgroups:181Wiedner and GieseckeGrowing importance of qualifications. Less-skilled immigrants increasingly fall behindthe native majority in their labor-market outcomes, as they hold less valuable (hos-t-country) qualifications, which puts them in an increasingly disadvantaged position,the more skill b(i)ased the economy becomes.Not only may existing group differences in human capital become more conse-quential, they may also widen over time (Kalter 2002). At the same time as the labormarket grew more skill intensive in Germany, the native population underwentsignificant educational expansion (Mayer et al. 2009). As younger and betterqualified cohorts enter the labor market, immigrant and native less-skilled workers’relative position becomes increasingly marginal.These processes likely put immigrants already in Germany at a disadvantage. Butwhat about newcomers? Does the population of new immigrant arrivals undergoeducational upgrading at the same rate as the native population? While Turkeyengaged in a substantial expansion of its education system during the period understudy (1976–2015), this process was very uneven across regions, ethnicities, andskill levels (Williamson 1987). It is, therefore, not clear a priori how the skillcomposition of the emigrant population from Turkey has changed over time. Ourdata from the German micro-census suggest that the upgrading of Turkish immi-grants’ qualification structure was substantially slower than that of native Germans(see Online Appendix B.1). What should be noted in any case, however, is thatimmigrants are aiming at a moving target: since higher qualifications have becomemore widespread in receiving societies, immigrants need ever-better training justto stay on par with the majority (Borjas 1985). If, as we have argued, Turks inGermany fall behind natives’ educational upgrading, we assume the followingsecond dimension of structural change to take effect:Educational expansion. Less-educated immigrants lose relative to natives in terms oflabor-market outcomes, insofar their levels of (host-country) education fall behindthose of natives who participate in educational upgrading.Labor-market Structure and Closure DynamicsMeso-level social structures — organizations, occupations, and unions — shapeworkers’ outcomes over and above their individual human capital, sometimescreating rents, which are the returns to a position over and above its market equili-brium price (Sørensen 2000; Weeden 2002). In Germany, collective bargaining andstate interference often lead to a situation where such positional premiums accrue toless-skilled workers, too (Hassel 1999; Dustmann, Ludsteck, and Schönberg 2009),and lower-skill employment has partially shifted from unionized manufacturing andheavy industries to lower-tier service jobs (Fernández-Macı́as 2012). Industrieswhere wage compression through collective bargaining (i.e., offering significantwage benefits also to less-skilled workers) was particularly strong have seen their182 International Migration Review 56(1)share of employment reduced dramatically (e.g., steel and mining) (Giesecke,Heisig, and Solga 2015). Lower-skill workers that have worked or would haveworked in the jobs that fell victim to sectoral change often either became unem-ployed or entered industries where wages and chances to create rents were lower(e.g., the low-end service sector) (Eichhorst, Marx, and Tobsch 2015).We claim that immigrant workers were hit particularly hard by these dynamics(see also Section B.3 of the Online Appendix for an empirical appraisal). InGermany, guest workers were historically concentrated in the labor-marketsegments that came under most pressure from shifts in production technology andoff-shore competition (Herbert 2001). These sectors were classic examples of highindustrialism, with relatively high wages and traditionally strong organized labor(Hassel 1999). In addition, German unions had succeeded early on in ensuringguest-worker coverage under collective bargaining agreements (Trede 2012). Thus,early immigrants probably profited from premiums in large unionized industrialcorporations in a similar way to native workers.While the core of our argument is compositional (immigrants were simply moreaffected by trends that, in principle, affected all lower-skill workers), the decline ofmanual jobs arguably had different effects for natives and immigrants. Nativeblue-collar workers, or at least their children, were supposedly better equippedthan their foreign peers to find new and better work, given the latter’s lack ofhost-country language skills and educational credentials (Aldashev, Gernandt, andThomsen 2009; Kanas and van Tubergen 2009). On average, then, industrialrestructuring should lead to native workers moving up, and immigrant workersmoving down, relative to the factory jobs of post-war industrialism. We, thus,propose a third dimension of structural change, which describes the effect of thedecline of lower-skill/high-rent employment in manufacturing on less-skilledimmigrants:De-industrialization. Positions in manufacturing and industry that combined relativelydecent pay levels with few qualification requirements have seen a strong decline. Asa result, less-skilled workers, particularly immigrants, who were overrepresented inthese sectors shifted to jobs of lesser quality. Sectoral change means that incomparison to natives, as well as to traditional immigrant positions, immigrantswork increasingly worse jobs.Turkish Immigration to GermanyTo demonstrate the relevance of these three dimensions, we focus on malefirst-generation Turkish immigrants in Germany. Three reasons make this group asuitable test case of our framework. First, Turkish immigration was, and to a largedegree still is, predominantly lower skill (see Section B.1 of the Online Appendix). It183Wiedner and Gieseckeis, thus, representative of the kind of immigrants that our argument expects to comeunder pressure from structural change.Second, Turkish immigration started in the 1960s, when post-war manufacturingand the upward mobility chances it supposedly implied for lower-skilled newcomerswere at their height. As Turkish immigration continues to date, we are able tocontrast immigrants’ relative position then with that of their successors, who wereincreasingly exposed to a new economic context. Note, however, that the period weexamine was not only one of technology-induced economic change, as, for instance,the Iron Curtain’s fall and several waves of EU enlargement also fall into our periodof investigation — historical events that affected labor-market equilibria, too.1Third, as a classic example of a so-called guest worker program, Turkish immi-gration to Germany was, in its beginning, closely linked to the dominantlabor-intensive mode of industrial production, which forms the basis of the com-paratively optimistic assessment of the mid-twentieth century past by migrationscholars (e.g., Gans 1992). In the 1960s, foreign workers were recruited to stabilizethe prevailing low-skill equilibrium in the labor market, where firms required moremanual workers than the West German market could provide. When economicconditions started to change in the early 1970s, foreign recruitment was halted in1973. However, high levels of Turkish migration continued (see Section B.4 of theOnline Appendix), as underage children joined their parents and spouses joined theirpartners in Germany (Herbert 2001). In the 1980s and 1990s, there were also asignificant number of humanitarian migrants, often from Turkey’s economicallyleast developed Kurdish regions (Sirkeci, Cohen, and Yazgan 2012). While in itsbeginning, Turkish immigration to Germany was assumed to be strictly temporary,by both migrants and authorities, stays in Germany turned out to be long term oreven permanent for a large proportion of immigrants (Herbert 2001). Still, as wedocument in Section B.4 of the Online Appendix, there has been substantial returnmigration to Turkey by former guest workers and their kin. Return migration poses aserious methodological challenge to research on immigrant assimilation (Dustmannand Görlach 2015), a problem we need to address in our empirical analyses (seebelow).1The collapse of socialist states in middle and eastern Europe and the unification of Germanyand Europe resulted in an influx of new workers who competed with the Turkish minority inWest Germany (Hönekopp 1997). On the other hand, these newly open countries alsoprovided new markets to German industry, stimulating employment and growth (Baas andBrücker 2010). The net labor-market effects of these historical shifts, as well as those ofother migration waves, particularly during the 1990s, remain debated (e.g., Brücker and Jahn2011; Zierahn 2012). While we acknowledge that they are possibly entangled with theprocesses on which we focus, it is impossible to fully “control” for their effects in a researchdesign like ours. This limitation should be born in mind when generalizing from our resultsto other countries.184 International Migration Review 56(1)Data and MethodsHarmonizing Mikrozensus Data for Longitudinal AnalysesWe base our empirical analyses on the scientific-use files (SUF) of the 31 officialGerman micro-censuses (MZ) between 1976 and 2015, each of which is a 0.7 percentsample of the population in (West) Germany consisting of roughly 500,000 respon-dents per round. Completion of most items in the MZ is mandated by law. Realizedresponse rates are reported to be around 96 percent (Thirolf et al. 2010). Thequestionnaire’s basic contents have remained the same since 1976, which makescross-temporal harmonization and analysis possible.The population analyzed in this article consists of all male Germans and malefirst-generation Turkish immigrants between the ages of 20 and 60, who had theirresidence in West Germany between 1976 and 2015. To allow for consistentidentification across different MZ rounds, we rely on respondents’ nationality todetermine group membership. We define “Germans” as those who held Germancitizenship and, if they held another citizenship, did not move to Germany after1949. This definition includes “ethnic” Germans, as well as (the children of) immi-grants insofar as they only held a German passport. “Turkish immigrants” are thosewho moved to Germany from abroad after their 18th birthday and held a Turkishpassport. We are forced to restrict our sample to men because the longitudinalanalysis of Turkish immigrant women’s labor-market behavior is plagued by addi-tional methodological problems (small numbers of employed women; strong andtime-variable family-cycle related selection in and out of employment; the fact thatTurkish women tend to be marriage, rather than labor, migrants) whose adequateconsideration goes beyond this article’s scope. Unfortunately, we are also restrictedto an analysis of the first generation because the second generation cannot beidentified with precision in the MZ prior to 2005.Employment and incomes. Harmonization of our first dependent variable, employ-ment, is straightforward, as it is consistently collected in the various MZ.A respondent is counted as employed if he/she reported paid work in the referenceweek, while the non-employed are those who either were unemployed or haddropped out of the labor market. The second dependent variable in our analyses isnet (i.e., post-tax/post-transfer) monthly personal income. Respondents were askeddirectly what their personal net income was during the reference month. We assumethat working respondents’ income was largely labor income. Note that by usingmonthly figures, our results reflect changes in wages and in hours worked. Sincewe only look at men, we assume that shorter working hours reflect involuntaryunderemployment and are, thus, appropriately treated as part of the group differ-ences to be explained. Monthly net figures, then, are the best income-based indicatorof workers’ social standing. All figures reported in the text pertain to the purchasingpower of 2010 Euros. The MZ’s questionnaire records income information as aninterval-censored variable. Incomes in the top category are right censored. Since we185Wiedner and Gieseckefocus on the median and on quantiles, our results are robust across different imputa-tions of top-censored values. We treat the remaining interval censoring as a missingdata problem. From this perspective, the uncensored income variable is missing onall observations, and all that we have are good predictors (the income bands) of thisvariable. We can, then, use a multiple imputation (MI) framework and itswell-established procedures to simulate plausible values for this variable and drawstatistical inference from them (Rubin 1987). Specifically, we draw five differentimputations from a non-informative uniform distribution between the respectiveupper and lower bounds, calculate all statistics using these five imputations, andderive reported estimates and standard errors by applying Rubin’s rule. Thisapproach leaves us with a continuously distributed variable and variance estimatesthat also reflect the additional uncertainty introduced by imputation.Independent variables. We use a categorical indicator for the highest qualificationattained to capture respondents’ education. We combine the variables for generaland vocational education into a single measure of eight levels.2 We use two variablesto represent respondents’ structural position in the labor market. To capture skill andtask differences between occupations, we resort to Blossfeld’s classification ofoccupations (1985), as adapted to the MZ by Schimpl-Neimanns (2003), whichdistinguishes among 12 skill/task groups. The industry of an employee’s companyis classified according to a simplified and time-consistent version of the FederalStatistical Office’s classification of industries, where we distinguish eight differenteconomic sectors.Analytic StrategyWe proceed in several steps. First, we visually report trends in Turks’ and Germans’employment and incomes. Second, we engage in a formal decomposition exercise.The goal of this exercise is to provide estimates of the importance of different dimen-sions of structural change for immigrants’ relative standing. Throughout, we employ abalancing approach to hold demographic characteristics constant across sampleswhen we discuss trends in outcomes among Turkish and German workers. Eachyearly sample is weighted to approximate the composition of the 1985 Turkish sampleon two variables: age and, for immigrants, duration of stay. The 1985 sample is anappropriate choice because its distributions of age and duration of stay fully overlap2The levels are: (less than) Hauptschule without vocational training degree, Realschulewithout vocational training degree, (less than) Hauptschule with vocational training degree,Realschule with vocational training degree, Abitur without vocational training degree, Abiturwith vocational training degree, technician’s or mastercraftsman’s diploma or equivalent,and tertiary education.186 International Migration Review 56(1)with those in all other yearly samples. We calculated weights, using an entropybalancing algorithm (Hainmueller 2012), so that the trends and decompositions wereport are net of changes in demographic composition. Figures A.2 and A.3 in theOnline Appendix document the improvement in balance this strategy yields. In graphswhere we distinguish between immigration cohorts, there is not sufficient overlap torely on balancing. Hence, we use (median) regression models to condition on age andage-squared in order to purge our estimates of life-cycle effects.In the case of employment trends, we base our results, including the decomposi-tions, on linear probability models. The analysis of incomes requires a moreelaborate approach, since it is unlikely that different kinds of immigrants areaffected by structural change in identical ways. We, thus, must distinguish betweenthe dynamics felt toward the top, in the middle, and in the lower half of incomes. Tounderstand these differing consequences of change, we report results for threequantiles (P25/P50/P75) of the group-specific distributions of incomes which rep-resent low-, middle-, and high-wage workers, respectively. Decompositions ofdifferences in statistics other than the mean have long posed a great challenge tostatisticians and applied researchers (Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo 2011). In thisarticle, we build on the work of Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009) and employ theRIF-regression (recentered influence function) approach to estimate decomposableunconditional quantile regressions.Decomposition ModelsTo determine structural change’s contribution to widening immigrant-native differ-ences in Germany, we rely on statistical decompositions. We use the extension of theoriginal Kitagawa-Oaxaca-Blinder-decomposition that was first introduced in Smithand Welch (1989) to analyze how change in groups’ characteristics and change inreturns to characteristics are related to change in outcome differentials (for details onthe method, see also Kim 2010).The goal of our longitudinal decomposition is to attribute historical change indifferences in employment or incomes between native Germans and immigrants to,first, changes in the distribution of employment or income-affecting variables betweengroups over time, second, to changes in the relevance of these variables, and third, toan unexplained residual. We refer readers to the Online Appendix’ Section A.2 forfurther explanations on our decomposition approach. Formally, this approach amountsto subtracting the cross-sectional decomposition equation at t¼ 1 from the equation att ¼ 2 and rearranging terms. The overall change of the estimated group-difference D̂of an outcome O between t ¼ 1 and t ¼ 2 measured in terms of the distributionalstatistic n,3 D̂nO;t¼2  D̂nO;t¼1; can then be decomposed in the following way:3n can be a proportion, as in the case of unemployment, or a quantile, as in our analysis ofincome.187Wiedner and GieseckeD̂nO;t¼2  D̂nO;t¼1 ¼DEEb̂A; pooled  D X t¼2  D X t¼1ð Þzfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl}|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{þDECb̂A;t¼2  b̂A; pooled  D X t¼2 þ b̂A;t¼1  b̂A; pooled  D X t¼1zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl}|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{þDCED X B;t¼2  D X B;t¼1  Db̂ pooledzfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl}|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{þDECDb̂t¼2  Db̂pooled  X B; t¼2 þ Db̂pooled  Db̂t¼1  X B; t¼1zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl}|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{where A/B indicates German/Turkish group membership and t¼ 1 and t¼ 2 indicatethe base and end year, respectively. The X are a vector of sample means, indicatingthe within-group share of a given occupation or education category, for example,and the b are returns to these indicators estimated using regression models. Thesubscript pooled denotes estimates from a benchmark sample, which comprises allsurvey years between t ¼ 1 and t ¼ 2 and which allows us to identify change in theeffects and means of predictors, relative to that reference. We report estimates basedon alternative choices of the benchmark sample in the Online Appendix, but resultsdo not change substantively if we define either end or starting year as the benchmarksample. Furthermore, we define bA, the returns to characteristics for Germans, as thereference vector, which indicates the relative importance of characteristics (seebelow). Further details and explanations on parametrization issues can be found inSection A.2 of the Online Appendix.The decomposition’s first two elements, DEE and DEC, provide estimates ofthe contribution of different dimensions of structural change to changes in groupdifferences. DEE captures the effect of change in group differences of characteris-tics, that is, the effect of groups becoming more or less similar in their measuredcharacteristics (as measured by D X t¼2  D X t¼1). Intuitively, this term’s contribu-tion will be higher, the more important the respective characteristic is and the moregroup differentials grow. With respect to human capital, DEE gives the amount ofchange in the outcome differential that is due to Germans’ educational expansion.With respect to labor-market positions, this term quantifies the amount of changedue to de-industrialization (Turkish and German workers becoming less similar inthe kinds of jobs they work).DEC captures the effect of change in the returns to characteristics, relative to theaverage across the period studied (as represented by b̂A;t¼2  b̂A; pooled andb̂A;t¼1  b̂A; pooled respectively). This term’s contribution will be larger, the moreimportant a characteristic has become and the more unequally it is distributed across188 International Migration Review 56(1)groups. With respect to human capital, DEC quantifies the contribution of thegrowing importance of skill.DCC captures the effects of the group-specific developments of returns and DCEthat of the empirical deviation of Turks’ bs from the reference vector. Phenomenathat are insufficiently captured by our models, like origin-based discrimination,systematically different returns to characteristics, measurement error, or otheromitted variables, will show up in this part of the decomposition. Because ofidentification issues in detailed decompositions of coefficients, we cannot interpretthese terms in detail and, thus, must treat them together as a residual coefficientcomponent, DC ¼DCE þ DCC (Yun 2005).Calculating standard errors of complex decomposition equations analytically isnot straightforward. Hence, we rely on a parametric bootstrap approach to estimateapproximate confidence intervals of decomposition components. We calculate eachdecomposition and its underlying regressions over 50 bootstrap samples and then usethe standard deviation of results as an estimate of a component’s standard error. Forthe analysis of incomes, we combine MI and bootstrap inference by repeating thebootstrap procedure in each imputed dataset (“MI Boot” in Schomaker andHeumann 2018).Before we move on, a caveat regarding the identification of our decompositionstrategy is in order. To the degree that our income regressions overestimate (under-estimate) causal returns to educational degrees, our estimates of the contribution ofeducational expansion (DEE) and the growing importance of skill (DEC) will bebiased upward (downward). However, studies on the returns to qualifications inGermany that apply a causal identification strategy produce estimates that are sim-ilar to, or even higher than, OLS estimates (Ichino and Winter-Ebmer 2004; Beckerand Siebern-Thomas 2007), which reflects international findings (Card 1999). Nev-ertheless, it is important to clarify that our results are not based on an explicit causalidentification strategy.Addressing Endogenous Sample SelectionThe information on which we rely is subject to potentially endogenous sampleselection at two points. First, workers are (self-)selected into employment and, thus,into the sample for our income analyses. Second, Turkish workers might re-migrateto Turkey or choose to become German citizens, thus either falling out of our samplealtogether or becoming part of the German group. If sample selection at these pointsis correlated with our dependent or independent variables, our analyses will yieldbiased results.At both points of selection, the share of omitted cases is too high to be safelyignored. Unemployment in Germany has, at times, been in the double digits (seeFigure 1). Likewise, re-migration of Turks in Germany has been substantial (seeSection B.4 of the Online Appendix), and hundreds of thousands of Turkish immi-grants naturalized over the last decades (Destatis 2018). While research for Germany189Wiedner and Gieseckeon the selectivity of re-migration tends to find little selection on education, incomes,and integration measures (Constant and Massey 2002, 2003; Diehl and Liebau 2015;Dustmann and Görlach 2015; Kuhlenkasper and Steinhardt 2017), we know thatmigrants with higher educational levels are more likely to naturalize (Steinhardt2007; Worbs 2008). We examine the selectivity of non-employment, outmigration,and naturalization in our data with respect to observed characteristics in detail in theOnline Appendix, Section A.3.To address potential selection issues, we employ a simulation strategy in the spiritof Manski (1989). This approach attempts to recreate the counterfactual distributionof outcomes that would have prevailed, had omitted values been observed, under arange of different assumptions. This strategy allows us to test our findings’ robust-ness even under conditions of extreme selectivity. Concretely, we impute unob-served incomes and employment states based on observed characteristics, usingmultiple imputation techniques. If potential respondents are missing entirelybecause of re-migration or naturalization, we extrapolate their entries from thedistribution of education-birth-cohort-immigration-cohort cells in earlier surveyyears and impute missing covariates as implied by these three variables. In the maintext, we report results for the assumption that non-employment, remigration, andnaturalization are not selective with respect to incomes (and employment),.6.7.8.91Share employed1980 1990 2000 2010 2020Germans Turks Turks (incl. naturalized)Figure 1. Employment trends among Turkish and German men.Sources: MZ 1976–2015, own calculation.Notes: Age and years since migration held constant using balancing weights. Mean age: 41.2years; mean years since migration: 13.4 years. Shaded areas give the 95% confidence interval.190 International Migration Review 56(1)conditional on observed covariates. That is, our results reflect the selectivity aboutwhich we know, but not potential selectivity on unobserved variables. The OnlineAppendix provides results for a range of alternative assumptions about endogenousselection with respect to income potential and employment likelihood, as well as adetailed description of our simulation approach. These alternative results consis-tently show that while different assumptions about the nature of selection do some-what affect the respective sizes of coefficient estimates, they do not imply a differentsubstantive conclusion.ResultsInequality Trends between 1976 and 2015How did Turks’ labor-market standing develop between 1976 and 2015? This sec-tion provides evidence on immigrants’ economic integration, using two indicators:employment probabilities and monthly net incomes. It is descriptive in nature and,hence, does not correct for sample selection. As we explain above, the followingresults are statistically controlled for demographic changes but otherwise uncondi-tional. Figure 1, which compares the employment rates of German men and a groupof same-aged Turkish male immigrants, shows that in contrast to the mild drop inGermans’ employment rate (from around 93 percent in 1976 to 87 percent in theearly 2000s), Turks’ employment collapsed from around 96 percent in 1976 to lessthan 75 percent in 2004. Employment rates of both Germans and Turks picked upagain after 2004, and the immigrant gap narrowed. Importantly, this result is virtu-ally unaffected by considering (possibly selective) naturalization of Turkish immi-grants. The dotted line gives result for an alternative definition of the Turkish group,which includes formerly Turkish men who acquired German citizenship. Theseresults overlap almost entirely with those obtained using our simplecitizenship-based group definition. The necessary information for this exercise isonly available since 2005, however.Figure 2, which shows the difference in employment rates between immigrantsand Germans for several arrival cohorts, documents that the overall divide evidentfrom Figure 1 is the product of cohort and period trends. For ease of presentation, weomit the largely identical results using the alternative definition of the Turkishgroup. For most cohorts, we find employment gaps between Turkish immigrantsand same-aged Germans that are initially high but reduce with time spent in Ger-many, which fits non-labor immigrants’ common adaptation profile. However, in theearly 1990s, as well as in the early 2000s, we can see that relative employment fallsacross all migration cohorts, before picking up again after 2004. We also see thatuntil the 2000s, later cohorts tended to start off relatively worse than earlier ones.These observations fit with theoretical perspectives on immigrant adaptation that191Wiedner and Gieseckeemphasize structural change in the receiving context (e.g., Zhou 1997). Period trendsare also evident in the profile of the actual guest worker cohort (1961–1973) whoarrived with employment essentially guaranteed. Beginning in the late 1980s, theiremployment fell dramatically in comparison to Germans from the same generation,who were exposed to the same structural dynamics. This development hints atstructural change having different implications for immigrants and native workers.We now move to investigate Turks’ relative standing in employment and exam-ine their incomes compared to that of Germans. Figure 3 shows a falling trend inimmigrant-native ratios of monthly net incomes. Age and duration of stay arebalanced across samples and groups. While the 25th percentile (P25) of the Turkishdistribution corresponded to about 93 percent of a German worker’s income at P25in the late 1970s, this figure had significantly eroded to below 75 percent in the2010s. The P50 ratio fell from about 87 percent to 75 percent in 2015. Turkishincomes at P75 were only about 65 percent as high as German incomes at P75 in2015. As in Figure 1, there is no evidence of a bias through selective naturalization.The lines representing the alternative group definition including naturalized-.3-.2-.10.1Difference inemployment probability1980 1990 2000 2010 20201961-1973 1974-19841985-1994 1995-2004 Figure 2. Employment difference between male Turkish immigrants and same-aged Germanmen, by arrival cohort.Sources: MZ 1976–2015, own calculation.Notes: Linear probability model results by census year, controlling for age and age-squared.Shaded areas give the 95% confidence interval.192 International Migration Review 56(1)Turkish-origin workers show patterns that are very similar to the simple citizenshipdefinition. Additional analysis, which are available in the Online Appendix, breakup the general trend by cohort. This exercise demonstrates that Turks’ deterioratingrelative positions are not due to immigrant replenishment (i.e., an influx ofless-adapted newcomers statistically diluting overall integration trends). On thecontrary, gaps between same-aged male Turks and Germans grew even withinarrival cohorts.The descriptive results presented here are in line with previous studies (e.g.,Herwig and Konietzka 2012). First-generation Turks in Germany dramatically fellbehind natives on host-country labor markets during the shift from manufacturing toservices, although employment differentials have contracted between 2004 and2015. While these figures are suggestive, we cannot draw conclusions from uni-variate trends about the drivers of increased group differentials. We, thus, now moveto our central contribution, the results from our decomposition analysis, and examineto what degree the mechanisms we have proposed as measurable interpretations ofthe manufacturing exceptionalism thesis account for the observed trends..7.8.91Immigrant-native ratio1980 1990 2000 2010P25 P50 P75 incl. naturalizedFigure 3. Development of male immigrant-native income ratios at the 25th, 50th and 75thpercentiles.Sources: MZ 1976–2015, own calculation.Notes: Age and years since migration held constant using balancing weights. Mean age: 41.2years; mean years since migration: 13.4 years. Shaded areas give the 95% confidence interval.193Wiedner and Giesecketotal employmentObserved relative trendEC educationReturns to qualificationsEE educationEducational expansion C-20-1001020-20-10010201976-20042004-2015Percentage point difference to German trendFigure4.Contributionofeducationtochangeinimmigrant-nativeemploymentdifferentials.194Explaining Growing Ethnic DisparitiesTo explain the growing disadvantage faced by male Turkish workers and to testthe theoretical mechanisms we have proposed, we now present results of formaldecompositions of these trends. We ask which facets of macro-structural changecontributed how much to trends in immigrant-native differences (net of demographybut otherwise unconditional). Figure 4 shows the results of linear probability decom-positions of employment probabilities for two periods: 1976–2004 and 2004–2015.4This periodization reflects the differing aggregate dynamics of rising (1976–2004)and contracting (2004–2015) group differences in employment. The plots show thecontribution of relative changes in groups’ educational profile (DEE) and of changesin returns to education (DEC) to the trend in employment differences, net of age andduration of stay and corrected for selective (on observed variables) outmigration andnaturalization. Change that is unaccounted for by our models is reflected in thecoefficient component DC. Parameters of the underlying regression models can befound in the Online Appendix, as can results for alternative assumptions regardingthe selectivity of outmigration and naturalization. These results show that our overallconclusions hold even under extreme assumptions about the nature of selection inour data.A first observation that emerges from Figure 4 is that changes in the groups’relative education composition (DEE) played only a minor role in shaping relativeemployment trends. While between 1976 and 2004, Turkish employment droppedby more than 25 percentage points (p.p.) more than German employment, our resultssuggest that practically none of this increasing gap is due to a faster educationalexpansion among Germans compared to Turks. The data, therefore, do not supportan important role of the educational expansion argument with respect to employ-ment. To understand this finding, we must bear in mind that in Germany, unem-ployment risks are concentrated among the least educated without any vocationaltraining (OECD 2020) and that the relative share of this group has decreased onlymildly, among both immigrants and natives (OECD 2019, esp. Table A1.2; see alsoSection B.2 in the Online Appendix). Intuitively, in those parts of the qualificationdistribution that matter for employment probabilities, there was hardly any changebetween groups over time. On the other hand, more than 7 p.p., or more than a thirdof male Turks’ increasing disadvantage between 1976 and 2004, were linked to thefact that Turks were overrepresented in the lowest-skill groups that increasinglyfared worse. We would expect this pattern, based on the literature on the growingrelevance of skill (e.g., Dustmann, Ludsteck, and Schönberg 2009): As vocationalqualifications became more important as insurance against unemployment duringthe transition from manufacturing to services, Turks fell behind because they held4For the analysis of employment dynamics, we only consider the education variables, not theposition indicators, which were not collected continuously for the last job worked in the MZ.195Wiedner and Gieseckecomparatively fewer vocational qualifications. The decomposition, thus, supportsthe manufacturing exceptionalism argument.Between 2004 and 2015, a period marked by overall strong macroeconomicexpansion in Germany, Figure 1 shows that group differences contracted markedly.Figure 4 repeats this insight but also shows that neither changes in the stock ofTurkish human capital vis-à-vis Germans nor a better prospect of lower-skilledworkers generally contributed to the observed trend (DEE). This result echoes thefinding of Dustmann, Glitz, and Vogel (2010) that immigrant employment is moresensitive to the economic cycle, even net of education. It is at this point unclearwhether our results indicate a reversal of longer-term trends or whether during aneconomic boom, the business cycle dynamics discussed by Dustmann et al. maskongoing secular shifts against lower-skilled immigrants.We now turn to ethnic stratification trends within the working population.Figure 3 shows an almost monotonic erosion of Turks’ standing at P25 and P50.How can this trend be explained? The manufacturing exceptionalism thesis arguesthat de-industrialization and changing skill demand have made economic adaptionharder for less-skilled immigrants. To formally test this hypothesis, we link trends inincome differences to changes in education and structural labor market position in astatistical decomposition.EC educationReturns to qualificationsEE educationEducational expansionEC positionsEE positionsDe-industrializationCtotal  log-incObserved divergence-.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1P25 P50 P75log-inc difference to German trendFigure 5. Contribution of education and labor market position to change in log-incomegroup-differentials, 1976–2015.Sources: MZ 1976–2015, own calculation.Notes: Unconditional quantile decomposition results of change in immigrant-native logmonthly income differentials. Results based on 50 parametric bootstrap replications and 5 MIreplications. Age and years since migration held constant using balancing weights. Mean age:41.2 years; mean years since migration: 13.4 years. Re-migrated and naturalized cases as wellas shadow incomes of non-working population imputed under the assumption of ignorableselection given covariates.196 International Migration Review 56(1)In line with Figure 3, Figure 5 shows that between 1976 and 2015, group differ-ences grew most markedly in the lower half of the income distributions (i.e., at p50and p25). But are these patterns consistent with the three structural processes pro-posed above? In the following, we interpret the results obtained from setting thepooled sample as the benchmark and use a correction for sample selection thatassumes selection to be uncorrelated with income, net of observables. Our conclu-sions, however, also hold if we base them on the specifications using start or endyear as a benchmark and under alternative assumptions about selectivity, which wereport in the Online Appendix. Looking at the education rows of Figure 5, we findthat during our observation period, Germans outpacing Turks in the uptake ofeducation (DEE) was a significant contributor to growing group differences, partic-ularly at P50 and P75, even net of labor-market positions. While Figure 4 suggestedthat changes in Turks’ level of training relative to that of Germans had negligibleconsequences for entering the labor market, once we focus on differences within the-.3-.2-.10.1Change in occupation-industryemployment share, 1976-20150 20 40 60 80Occupation-industry income premium rankTurks smooth Germans smoothTurks GermansFigure 6. Employment-shifts among immigrant and native workers between 1976 and 2015.Sources: MZ 1976–2015, own calculation.Notes: Occupation-industry-cells are defined as the interaction of Blossfeld’s occupationclassification with an 8-industry-classification. Size of markers corresponds to the averageemployment share across the period. Occupation-industry income premium rank is based onthe size-order of occupation-industry-coefficients in a linear regression of log-incomes, net ofage, age-squared and education pooling all samples. Smoothed vales are calculated as locallyweighted first-order polynomial regression estimates using a bandwidth of 6 ranks and aGaussian kernel. Occupation-industry-cells with less than 0.1% of employment omitted.197Wiedner and Gieseckelabor market, Germans’ pattern of educational upgrading put Turks at a disadvan-tage. Turning to the effects of the growing importance of skill (DEC education), wefind that this process disadvantaged Turkish workers below, but not above, themedian, even when labor-market position was held constant. This observation isconsistent with the uneven effects of upskilling and educational expansion: as edu-cational expansion in Germany happened mainly at the top of the educational hier-archy, changing relative skill demand meant that disadvantages at the bottom of thathierarchy, rather than advantages at the top, increased. Turks in the lower half of theincome distribution were far more likely than Germans to hold no or low qualifica-tions; thus, they were disproportionately affected by this process.So far, our findings are in line with the two expectations derived from thehuman-capital literature: first, that educational expansion among natives leaveslower-skilled immigrants worse off and, second, that the increasing importance offormal educational works against lower-skilled immigrants as a group. However, thecore of pessimist appraisals of recent less-skilled immigrants’ upward mobilitychances concerns modern labor markets’ changing sectoral composition (e.g.,Gans 1992). Did de-industrialization contribute to growing income gaps betweenmale Turkish immigrants and German natives? Our results support such a conclu-sion, especially for the lower half of Turkish incomes. The contribution of the DEEposition component that represents the combined effects of occupational positionsand industries is negative, indicating that Turkish workers shifted to positions whichoffered fewer positional premiums (net of one’s own human capital). We wouldexpect such a pattern, based on our de-industrialization hypothesis. Figure 5 containsanother, subtler insight: the DEC component of position indicators is consistentlypositive, showing that workers who stayed in labor-market positions with a largeshare of Turks witnessed increasing premiums to these positions.De-industrialization, therefore, did not typically mean that Turkish jobs fared worsebut that Turks at and below the median typically shifted to worse jobs.This process is illustrated by Figure 6, which plots the p.p. change in theemployment share of occupation-industry cells, defined as the cross-classificationof our industry and occupation indicators, against the rank of their average incomepremiums during that period. We can, thus, see to what degree employment shiftedbetween relatively better and relatively worse labor-market positions. Employmentin middling categories declined for both Germans and Turkish immigrants, but muchstronger among Turkish workers. For both groups, the largest declines were amongun- and semi-skilled manual workers in manufacturing. While among Germanworkers, positions above these categories witnessed the largest employment gains,employment increases among Turks were concentrated in the lowest third ofoccupation-industry cells, particularly in unskilled service occupations. Figure 6,thus, illustrates a striking shift of immigrant employment from medium-pay (man-ual) occupations to low-pay occupations, but much less so for native employment.As the decline of middling positions had apparently different implications for198 International Migration Review 56(1)immigrants and natives, this perspective offers yet more support for the importanceof de-industrialization in the growth of group differences.Summary and ConclusionDoes the relatively equitable integration of lower-skilled immigrants depend on amanufacturing-centered economy? To address this question, we investigated therelative socio-economic position of first-generation Turkish men in Germanybetween the mid-1970s and mid-2010s, a period of profound sectoral change(Oesch 2013). Our review of explanations for rising inequality duringde-industrialization identified three historical forces that should come with negativeimplications for lower-skilled immigrants: the educational expansion argument, thegrowing importance of qualifications argument, and the de-industrializationargument.We find strong evidence that Turkish immigrant men fell behind Germans in theirlabor-market success between the 1970s and the 2010s. Our analysis of a countrywith comparatively low increases of overall inequality in this time period is, there-fore, in line with similar studies in other contexts (e.g., Bevelander 2001; Gustafssonand Zheng 2006; Rosholm, Scott, and Husted 2006). An original insight provided byour analyses is that macro-social change had very different implications for immi-grants of different skill groups. Especially the economically weakest immigrantsfound it increasingly hard to compete in a changing labor market.The core of our analysis, and our main contribution, is a quantification of differ-ent mechanisms that contributed to these trends, using statistical decompositiontechniques. This approach provides a novel, direct test of prominent arguments and,thus, adds important evidence to a literature dominated by descriptive approaches(c.f., Reitz 2001; Lubotsky 2011; Moreno-Galbis et al. 2019). The decompositionswe undertook generally support the three hypotheses on the sources of growingimmigrant-native differentials. The argument that group differences widened as aresult of a growing importance of qualifications is clearly supported for employmentprior to 2004 and for incomes at and below the median. Trends in the returns toqualifications put Turks at a disadvantage. The educational expansion argumentapplies across the income distribution, especially to the top, but shows hardly anycontribution to employment differentials. We conclude that Turkish immigrantswere disadvantaged not only because there was less demand for less-skilled laborbut also because they faced a host society which rapidly increased its human-capitalprofile. Finally, our data provide evidence in favor of the de-industrialization argu-ment, which forms the core of segmented assimilation scholars’ pessimist diagnosis(Gans 1992; Zhou 1997). Even net of the challenging trends at the level of individualhuman capital, we can discern an inequality-increasing shift of Turkish workers at orbelow the median to disadvantaged labor-market positions. It should be noted,however, that while male Turks did, indeed, shift to worse positions, the manufac-turing positions in which they were concentrated experienced a positive199Wiedner and Gieseckedevelopment in terms of income premiums. Speculatively, such a pattern would bein line with accounts that diagnose a growing dualization of the Germannon-graduate labor market, with a continuously privileged, but shrinking, core andexpanding fringes of more precarious work (Palier and Thelen 2010).In sum, our results imply a sobering outlook for the economic adjustment ofcurrent cohorts of lower-skilled immigrants in affluent countries. Our analysis ofthe changing fortune of Germany’s largest guest-worker immigrant group suggeststhat economic polarization between immigrants and natives is likely to grow furtherif the trends we describe continue to affect advanced economies. Relatively egali-tarian labor-market integration of large numbers of less-skilled immigrants, itap