Resilience Development in Multiple Shocks: Lessons in Mental Health and Well-Being Deterioration during COVID-19

Citation: Zhou, K.; Zhang, M.Resilience Development in MultipleShocks: Lessons in Mental Healthand Well-Being Deterioration duringCOVID-19. Systems 2022, 10, 183.https://doi.org/10.3390/systems10050183Academic Editors: Jack Homer andGary B. HirschReceived: 3 September 2022Accepted: 6 October 2022Published: 10 October 2022Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional affil-iations.Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).systemsArticleResilience Development in Multiple Shocks: Lessons in MentalHealth and Well-Being Deterioration during COVID-19Ke Zhou 1,* and Mengru Zhang 21 UCL Institute for Environmental Design and Engineering, The Bartlett Faculty of The Built Environment,University College London, London WC1H 0NN, UK2 The Wright Institute, Berkeley, CA 94704, USA* Correspondence: ke.zhou@ucl.ac.ukAbstract: Resilience describes individuals’ and organizations’ recovery from crises and adaptationto disturbances and adversities. Emerging research shows the deterioration of the population’smental health and well-being during the multiple waves of the COVID-19 pandemic, suggesting thatthe resilience developed is insufficient to address the system’s persistent shocks. Drawing on thefindings on mental health and well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic and the psychological andorganizational resilience theories, we developed a system dynamics theory model exploring howthe presence of multiple shocks to the system challenges the population’s health and well-being. Weinitiated the model with three shocks with the same intensities and durations, and then experimentedwith scenarios in which the strength of multiple shocks (duration and intensity) was attenuated andamplified. The model showed that temporary environmental adjustments with limited long-termstabilized solutions and a lack of health service provision can increase the accumulative risks of healthand well-being deterioration. We highlight the role of essential health service sectors’ resilience andindividuals’ and organizations’ tolerance of adversities and disturbances in providing sustainableresilience. We conclude by discussing critical factors in organizational and psychological resiliencedevelopment in crises with multiple shocks to the system.Keywords: COVID-19; resilience; system dynamics1. IntroductionAs of August 2022, COVID-19 has caused over six million deaths and approximately600 million confirmed cases worldwide [1]. While many of us hoped that COVID-19would be over before the summer of 2020 after the first wave, the pandemic continuedwith multiple ongoing waves of increasing diseases and cases. Despite the attempts andresponses to the pandemic from multiple levels, the system has not developed enoughresilience to address the ongoing shocks and waves of the crisis. In the U.K., multiplestudies have shown the population’s deterioration in mental health and overall well-beingbetween March and May 2020 [2]. Followed by a period of improvement in the summer of2020, there was a second deterioration in population mental health and well-being betweenOctober 2020 and February 2021. Studies have shown that inequality in population mentalhealth and psychological distress was significantly higher in the second wave [3]. Thethreat of persistent stress on health is also lasting. Trajectory analysis of psychological well-being in the COVID-19 waves showed that nearly two-fifths of the population experiencedelevated distress risk [4]. The risk of persistent deterioration shows that the experienceof distress in the first wave was not transformed into resilience to respond to followingshocks in the second and third waves.Resilience describes how the system recovers and adapts to the disturbances in crises.At the individual level, resilience refers to how individuals retrieve stability in healthy func-tioning and develop insights and learnings to positively adapt to future disturbances [5,6].Systems 2022, 10, 183. https://doi.org/10.3390/systems10050183 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/systemsSystems 2022, 10, 183 2 of 29Crises bring multiple shocks to a complex system in which individual resilience intercon-nects with social and physical ecology factors at the group and organizational levels [7–9].Pandemics require integrated systems to provide prevention and treatment services [10],as well as require organizations and their members to provide and adjust to new normsof collaboration and communication. However, mitigation measures might upend peo-ple’s economic and social lives, leading to increases in psychological distress [4]. Themental health and well-being deterioration during the COVID-19 pandemic indicates thatresilience development has not been activated or is insufficient for handling persistentstress, strains, and adversity.While the resilience literature views adversity, strain, and significant barriers asbringing opportunities for adaptation and development [11,12], it is unclear how human–environment resilience is interconnected and provides the population and system withsustainable recovery during the multiple waves of crises.System dynamics modeling offers opportunities to explore and theorize resiliencedevelopment by exploring the causal and feedback mechanisms of the risk of accumulativeinterruptions and resilience development [13,14]. System dynamics focus on the feedbackstructures that underlie complex behaviors [15]. Through computer-aided simulationmodels, we can explore the underlying mechanisms to advance theory development [16,17].By drawing on the findings of mental health and well-being during the COVID-19 pandemicand psychological and organizational resilience theories, we developed a small systemdynamics theory model exploring how the presence of multiple shocks to the systemchallenges the population’s health and well-being.Our contributions are two-fold: First, drawing on the psychosocial (individual) andorganizational resilience literature, we contribute to the theorizing of multisystemic ap-proaches in resilience development, especially when the system is exposed to risks ofmultiple shocks. Second, we explore the accumulative risk of the population’s healthand well-being deterioration and propose interventions that can help mitigate and protectpopulation well-being in long-crisis events such as COVID-19.2. COVID-19 and Multisystemic Perspectives in Resilience DevelopmentThis section summarizes the resilience perspectives in relation to COVID-19 andprovides an overview of psychological resilience and organizational resilience theories.2.1. Resilience Development during COVID-19The systematic review revealed that the deterioration of health and well-being, espe-cially the negative impact on mental well-being, including high rates of anxiety, depression,posttraumatic stress disorder, and psychological and emotional distress, is widespreadworldwide [18]. In the U.K., the COVID-19 mental health and well-being surveillancereport [2] published by Public Health England showed that mental health and well-beingduring the pandemic has demonstrated an “up-and-down” pattern, in that there have beencontinuous deteriorations in health and well-being throughout the multiple waves. Thereport synthesized insights from multiple data sources, such as the University College Lon-don’s COVID-19 Social Study and national data from the Office for National Statistics. Thereport highlighted a general increase in psychological stress during the pandemic, particu-larly for young people aged between 18 to 34 years. Analysis from the U.K. HouseholderLongitudinal Study further suggested that the second wave of COVID-19 was associatedwith a significant increase in psychological distress [19]. As Figure 1 shows, the proportionof people with clinically significant levels of psychological distress rose from 20.7% to 29.8%compared to the pre-pandemic levels. Between October 2020 and February 2021, a seconddeterioration in the population’s mental health and well-being was observed [19]. By March2021, the distress levels increased to 27.1%, significantly higher than the pre-pandemiclevel [19]. Even though the majority of the population are resilient or recovered quickly,two-fifths of the population experienced significant and severe distress repeatedly andcontinuously [4].Systems 2022, 10, 183 3 of 29Systems 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 30   population are resilient or recovered quickly, two-fifths of the population experienced significant and severe distress repeatedly and continuously [4].   Long-term distress exposure increases mortality risk and results in poor health out-comes [20]. Due to the nature of the long-lasting and prolonged effect of COVID-19, re-searchers pay increasing attention to trajectory changes in the multiple waves of crises [3,4,21,22]. Health systems’ resilience in governance, health workforce, provision of med-ical products, and health service delivery has been stressed [23]. Aside from vaccination and hospital capacity, health workers’ well-being also influences service capacity. Green-berg et al. [24] suggested that the National Health Service (NHS), as an organization, needs to provide post-trauma social support to healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic facing increasing numbers of working hours.  Emerging research presents a resilience perspective that the unprecedented and pro-longed pandemic brings shocks to individuals’ health and well-being [22], and the health service system [25], and significant disturbances at all societal levels [26]. However, de-spite the attention to resilience development in relation to COVID-19, there is limited knowledge and theory of resilience development in crises with multiple shocks.  Figure 1. Changes in population mental health and well-being. Adapted from Daly and Robinson [19]. Copyright (2022), with permission from Elsevier. 2.2. Clinical and Multisystemic Perspectives in Psychological Resilience Psychological resilience at the clinical level promotes personal assets and protects them from the adverse effects of stressors [6]. Psychological resilience indicates less ap-praisal of negative emotions, higher capacity of meta-cognition in response to felt emo-tions [5,6], more insights and self-reflection [27], positivity [28], psychological flexibility [29], and adaptive coping strategies. A multisystemic perspective in psychological resili-ence theory concerns a process where various systems (biological, psychological, social, and ecological) interact in ways that help individuals to regain, sustain, or improve their mental well-being in contexts of adversity and distress [9]. Psychological resilience can vary among different populations and cultural communities. It reinforces positive and protective/presentive aspects at different stages of the stress process. The multisystemic perspective has broadened the understanding and facilitation of psychological resilience. At the individual level, the study of children with abuse experi-ence recognizes cognitive appraisal, high rumination, high distress tolerance, low sup-pression of emotion, low expression of aggression, and a secure attachment relating to high psychology resilience [30]. Family- and community-level factors such as family co-hesion, parental involvement, social support, and household income contribute to psy-chological and behavioral changes in resilience [30]. Recent findings have recognized that i in population mental health and well-being. Adapted from Daly nd Robinson [19].Copyright (2022), with permission fr m Elsevier.Long-term distres exposure incr ases mortality risk and results in poor health outcomes [20].Due to the nature of the long-lasting and prolonged effect of COVID-19, researchers pay increas-ing attention to trajectory changes in the multiple waves of crises [3,4,21,22]. Health systems’resilience in governance, health workforce, provision of medical products, and healthservice delivery has been stressed [23]. Aside from vaccination and hospital capacity, healthworkers’ well-being also influences service capacity. Greenberg et al. [24] suggested thatthe National Health Service (NHS), as an organization, needs to provide post-trauma socialsupport to healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic facing increasing numbersof working hours.Emerging research presents a resilience perspective that the unprecedented and pro-longed pandemic brings shocks to individuals’ health and well-being [22], and the healthservice system [25], and significant disturbances at all societal levels [26]. However, despitethe attention to resilience development in relation to COVID-19, there is limited knowledgeand theory of resilience development in crises with multiple shocks.2.2. Clinical and Multisystemic Perspectives in Psychological ResiliencePsychological resilience at the clinical level promotes personal assets and protects themfrom the adverse effects of stressors [6]. Psychological resilience indicates less appraisalof negative emotions, higher capacity of meta-cognition in response to felt emotions [5,6],more insights and self-reflection [27], positivity [28], psychological flexibility [29], andadaptive coping strategies. A multisystemic perspective in psychological resilience theoryconcerns a process where various systems (biological, psychological, social, and ecological)interact in ways that help individuals to regain, sustain, or improve their mental well-beingin contexts of adversity and distress [9]. Psychological resilience can vary among differentpopulations and cultural communities. It reinforces positive and protective/presentiveaspects at different stages of the stress process.The multisystemic perspective has broadened the understanding and facilitation ofpsychological resilience. At the individual level, the study of children with abuse experiencerecognizes cognitive appraisal, high rumination, high distress tolerance, low suppression ofemotion, low expression of aggression, and a secure attachment relating to high psychologyresilience [30]. Family- and community-level factors such as family cohesion, parentalinvolvement, social support, and household income contribute to psychological and be-havioral changes in resilience [30]. Recent findings have recognized that biological genes,confounded by factors such as the environment, population, and demographic features,are associated with the complexity of individual resilience [31]. Furthermore, culturalSystems 2022, 10, 183 4 of 29dynamics and contexts and environmental safety and security also impact how individualsadjust to adversity [8]. Compared to narrow perspectives on individual dynamics, the mul-tisystemic perspective stresses that psychological resilience is a complex phenomenon ofintersectionality, which dynamically varies and shifts alongside individuals, communities,and societal systems.Clinical facilitation of psychological resilience may relate to interventions on theindividual psyche to achieve protective psychological features and personal development,as mentioned above, to prevent individuals from being overwhelmed by emotional distressand adversity. By strengthening one’s tolerance of distress, individuals are equipped witha range of coping skills and strategies for adjusting and coping with adversity. Clinicalcontact, as a kind of interpersonal contact with its frame, provide relational social support,companionship, and a process where the individual has the space to explore and experiencetheir own resilience and personal assets. Relevant psychoeducation, taking into accountintersectionality, can include contextual factors, such as cultural identity, communityenvironment, and external systems, in interventions. Lastly, community clinical settingscan identify and bridge an individual with needed social welfare support, resources, andsocial advocacy, so that one may regain homeostasis in their social and ecological systems.2.3. Organizational Resilience and ImpactExploring interconnections between individual and organizational resilience is crucialfrom the multisystemic perspective as organizations underly the complex system andgenerate mitigation and actions [32]. Discontinuity and disruption not only cause adversityfor individuals to respond to [7], but also raise a question regarding to what extent theenvironment is stable for people in acute distress. Crisis events such as climate change,energy (gas) crises, and extreme weather events leave high-level complexities and uncer-tainties for organizations to adapt to [33]. Thus, the idea of organizational resilience andhow organizations adapt to exogenous changes are becoming increasingly relevant andessential. For example, Bryce et al. [25] argued that the U.K. government and NHS need to“readjust” to the new environment by operating through national emergency preparedness,aside from coping with the challenge of inadequate resource provision in terms of virustests, ventilators, and personal protective equipment.Organizational resilience describes the environment attempting to adjust to distur-bances in the environment. While turbulence and adverse events are often viewed nega-tively, resilience studies have the underlying aim of shifting from the tendency to focuson “failures, decline, and maladaptive or pathological cycles” to “how organizations con-tinually achieve desirable outcomes amid diversity” [11]. Meyer [34] framed sudden andunprecedented events as “environmental jolts” that create transient perturbations and forceorganizations to adapt to the environment. The process of averting maladaptive outcomesinvolves the organizations, their units, and members developing and mobilizing cognitive,emotional, relational, and structured resources to cope with adverse events. When organi-zations face sudden and unprecedented events, according to Meyer [34], resilience occurs ifthe organization absorbs the environmental jolt’s impacts and decreases deviation from theprevious order. Specifically, the process of adapting to environmental stimuli includes threephases: Anticipating changes and risks of failure, responding to and providing changes,and then readjusting the strategies and resources after the shocks.The psychodynamic perspective in organizational research has shed light on someof the unintended consequences of organizational defenses against disturbances derivedfrom external threats, internal conflicts, or the nature of work [35]. Understanding theinterplays of individual and organizational narratives in organizational changes is essential,as collective learning can develop "critical self-reflexivity and an identify-focused dialogue"to mitigate maladaptive defenses such as denial, rationalization, and idealization [36].In facing threats and potential risks in functioning and performance, learnings andinsights can inform strategy-making to be resilient to future disturbances [34]. Organiza-tional adaptations and learnings are “dynamic” and require “multi-institutional working”Systems 2022, 10, 183 5 of 29in broader systems [37]. Williams et al. [38] described that organizational members’ andorganizations’ responses to disturbance can change over time and shape future interpreta-tions and responses to adverse events. The responses depend on individuals’ cognitive,behavioral, emotional, and relational capabilities and their interactions with organizationalefforts in risk reduction and reliability, forming “feedback causal mechanisms” betweenindividuals and organizations [38].Although the connection between individual and organizational psychosocial re-silience has been recognized—for example, individual employees’ response to and copingwith adverse or significant traumatic events may influence their capacity to perform theirroles [33]—mainstream research on organizational resilience uses business performanceas one of the key indicators. According to Ilseven et al. [39], the critical components inmeasuring resilience are the magnitude and rate of the both drop and recovery in organiza-tions’ performance. The operational or engineering frame of organizational resilience ishelpful in that the functioning of organizations is essential. However, the frame misses themultisystemic perspective that individuals and members of organizations face psychosocialrisk or challenges, which influences how individuals collaborate and perform. As Kahnet al. [40] suggested, if the relational systems that underlie organizations remain disturbed,even when operational performance interruptions have been resolved, organizations canstill face dysfunctional patterns of behavior and longer-term performance issues.3. MethodsSystem dynamics modeling is a methodology that explores the complexity of circularcausality or feedback loops and how interactions between factors can result in non-linearbehaviors in the systems [15]. It can be applied to generate robust policies in specific real-world issues such as public health (e.g., [41–43]), climate and environmental (e.g., [44,45]),and operational and managerial issues (e.g., [46,47]). It is also widely used to informtheory building and testing [48], especially in organizational and management theories(e.g., [49–52]). The significant difference between theoretical and applied system dynamicsmodeling regards the steps in the modeling process (if specifics of policy arrangements needto be provided), data (if the collection of primary data is needed), and model boundaries(if the omission of specific variables and relationships is acceptable) [17]. While appliedmodeling is about developing a model to develop specific policy suggestions for thephenomenon under investigation, theory-based modeling focuses on generalizability andproviding incremental knowledge to explain and theorize a phenomenon without theabsolute need to collect empirical data on a specific instance [16,17,48,53]. Through model-based theory building, more profound insights can be gained and tested to inform thedevelopment of “minor and middle-range theories” that attempt to build generic andoverall explanations of a problem but have not yet been formed as a unified theory [53].A theory-based modeling approach was chosen to contribute to the theorizing ofresilience development in multiple shocks and to provide some generic learnings regardinghealth and well-being deterioration during the COVID-19 pandemic. A resilience modelwas developed via the following steps: First, health and well-being deterioration phenom-ena are defined through reports and data. The COVID-19 mental health and well-beingsurveillance report [2] was chosen mainly to aid in forming a definition of the problem,as it is one of the earliest publications synthesizing evidence in health and well-beingdeterioration during the COVID-19 pandemic. Second, a dynamic hypothesis was formedthrough reviewing the broader theories of psychological and organizational resilience.Third, the conceptualized model was developed iteratively by revising the initial structuresand conceptualization [54]. Lastly, the model was tested and provided equilibrium runsand different combinations of shock duration and intensity, providing directions for policytesting and insight.Systems 2022, 10, 183 6 of 294. Model ConceptualizationThis section describes the causal mechanisms and main feedback loops in the modelconceptualization.4.1. Resilience and DisturbanceThe model starts with a stock of Disturbance Events (see Figure 2. Resilience anddisturbance interconnections), representing the accumulation of disturbance events in thesystem. Disturbance events cause a departure from a standard or desired state [55]. Wefollowed the definition of disturbance by White and Pickett [56] (p.7), that “a disturbanceis any relatively discrete event in time that disrupts ecosystem, community, or populationstructure and changes resources, substrate availability, or the physical environment.” Inthe model, the stock of Disturbance Events increases with an inflow of average disturbanceevents per month, assuming that there is a constant exogenous inflow of disturbance eventsfor individuals to address. The stock decreases after the disturbances are processed by indi-viduals, which depends on the time needed to resolve events, effect of environmental resilience,and effect of individual resilience on decreasing disturbance events.++++---+ -++++PsychologicalResilienceDisturbanceEventsTime needed toresolve eventsAverage disturbanceevents per monthEffect of individual resilienceon processing disturbancesDecreasingdisturbance eventsDisturbance to temporaryadjustments ratioIncreasingdisturbance eventsDisturbance to resilience ratioResilience AdjustingEffect of environmentalresilience on decreasingdisturbance eventsResilience neededto address disturbance eventsResilience	HelpsProcess	DisturbancesB1b	Resilience	PreventsDisturbancesB1aTime and duration of shocks to the systemIntensity of each shockMultiple Shocks to the SystemThird	shock	intensitySecond	shock	intensityFirst	shock	intensityThird	shock	duration Third	shock	stopThird	shock	startInterval	tothird	shock	startMultiple	ShocksRisk	intensityof	each	shockSecond	shock	stopSecond	shockdurationSecond	shock	StartInterval	tosecond	shock	startFirst	shock	stopFirst	shock	startFirst	shock	durationFigure 2. Resilience and disturbance interconnections. The top box describes the conceptualization ofmultiple shocks to the system. The bottom part of the figure shows the causal links between resilienceand disturbance. Note: A positive (+) sign implies positive arrow polarity, meaning that an increase(decrease) in the cause variable will result in an increase (decrease) in the effect variable, compared towhat would have been otherwise and if everything else stays the same. A negative (−) sign impliespositive causality, meaning that an increase (decrease) in the cause variable will result in a decrease(increase) in the effect variable, compared to a what would have been otherwise and if everything elsestays the same. ‘B’ represents ‘balancing loops, meaning that an increase (decrease) of one variablewould trigger a decrease (increase) of this variable after travelling the full loop.Systems 2022, 10, 183 7 of 29Another stock in Figure 2 is Psychological Resilience, which represents the accumulationof resilience that individuals retain to address disturbances in the system. Resiliencedescribes how individuals recover from shock, acquire stability in healthy functioning,and adapt to disturbances. Increasing disturbance events increases the resilience needed toaddress disturbance events, demanding individuals to develop resilience and decreasingthe disturbance events perceived, which forms the first balancing loop—B1a: ResiliencePrevents Disturbances. As individuals resolving disturbance events, the stock of DisturbanceEvents decreases, decreasing the demand for resilience, which forms another balancingloop—B1b: Resilience Helps Process Disturbances.As shown in Figure 2, multiple shocks can create waves of disturbances in the system,increasing the inflow of the stock of Disturbance Events. To understand the impact of themultiple waves of crises on the system, we added three waves to the system, with theintensity and duration of each crisis that can be specified and changed.4.2. Psychological Resilience at the Population Level“Stress” describes people’s general experience of psychosocial distress, includinganxiety, depressive symptoms, sleep problems, self-reported mental health, loneliness, andgeneral stress. We used three stocks in the population structure to describe changes indistress levels at the population level: Low/mild Stress People, Highly Stressed People withoutHealth and Well-being (HW) Services, and Highly Stressed People with HW Services (see Figure 3).When low/mild stress people are exposed to crises or disturbance events, they move tothe Highly Stressed People without HW Services through the flow Stressing up. The speed ofmoving to high-stress stock depends on two variables: (1) The disturbance to resilience ratio,which measures individuals’ experience of disturbance level relative to their resiliencelevel; (2) time to change the stress level. Although crises with multiple waves can hit allthree population stocks, in the model, we assumed that the shocks do not bring additionaladversities for the people who are already in the two high-stress stocks.Systems 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 30     Figure 3. Population structure linking with resilience and disturbance. Short-term deterioration in health and well-being does not directly indicate an in-crease in mental illness or a need for HW service support. As this model aims to under-stand the connections between individual and organizational resilience and potential pol-icies, we assumed that a fraction of highly stressed people will use HW services and move to the third stock: Highly Stressed People with HW Services. A fraction of people from the service-using population might drop out and move to the Highly Stressed People without HW Services stock. People from the two high-stress stocks can recover after a specific time (2.5–3 months in the model) and move back to the Low/mild Stress People stock. The flow recovering by using services describes the process for people to gain higher tolerance of emo-tional distress and disturbance. The recovering process increases Psychological Resilience, which decreases the Stressing up process, decreasing highly stressed people with or with-out HW services, forming two balancing loops—B2a: Gain Resilience through Self-recov-ery and B2b: Gain Resilience through Service Recovery.  4.3. Health and Well-Being Service Sector Resilience At the organizational level, the health service sector is critical in supporting and help-ing highly stressed people recover and gain emotional tolerance to adversity and distress. HW services include a range of therapies, case management, and community-based sup-port. For example, brief treatments provide clinical intervention to decrease emotional distress, identify and reinforce strength and protective factors, introduce coping skills, increase relative insights, and provide social support and relational connection. HW ser-vices include triage systems that refer people to the appropriate level of care services. The process includes assessing the severity of psychological distress and can provide case management services with needed resources. We used the stock of HW Service Staff to measure the health and well-being service sector capacity (see Figure 4). We measured how many health and well-being support sessions can be provided monthly. In this model, Highly Stressed People without HW Services increase the total sessions demand, requiring HW organizations to hire more staff to increase the service capacity, forming the third balancing loop—B3: Reduce Out of Services. Here, we also considered the demand of the existing clients in the system. Highly stressed peo-ple using HW services are also part of the session’s demand. Providing services to the people already in the HW system indicates a further increase in the total sessions demand, which increases HW Service Staff as the capacity increase, forming the first reinforcing Figure 3. Population structure linking with resilience and disturbance.Short-term deteri ation in health nd well-being does not directly indicate an increasein mental illness or a need for HW service support. As this model aims to understand theconnections between individual and organizational resilience and p tential policies, weassumed that a fraction of highly stressed people will use HW services and move to thethird stock: Highly Stressed People with HW Services. A fraction of people from the service-using population might drop out and move to the Highly Stressed People without HW ServicesSystems 2022, 10, 183 8 of 29stock. People from the two high-stress stocks can recover after a specific time (2.5–3 monthsin the model) and move back to the Low/mild Stress People stock. The flow recovering byusing services describes the process for people to gain higher tolerance of emotional distressand disturbance. The recovering process increases Psychological Resilience, which decreasesthe Stressing up process, decreasing highly stressed people with or without HW services,forming two balancing loops—B2a: Gain Resilience through Self-recovery and B2b: GainResilience through Service Recovery.4.3. Health and Well-Being Service Sector ResilienceAt the organizational level, the health service sector is critical in supporting andhelping highly stressed people recover and gain emotional tolerance to adversity anddistress. HW services include a range of therapies, case management, and community-based support. For example, brief treatments provide clinical intervention to decreaseemotional distress, identify and reinforce strength and protective factors, introduce copingskills, increase relative insights, and provide social support and relational connection. HWservices include triage systems that refer people to the appropriate level of care services.The process includes assessing the severity of psychological distress and can provide casemanagement services with needed resources.We used the stock of HW Service Staff to measure the health and well-being servicesector capacity (see Figure 4). We measured how many health and well-being supportsessions can be provided monthly. In this model, Highly Stressed People without HW Servicesincrease the total sessions demand, requiring HW organizations to hire more staff to increasethe service capacity, forming the third balancing loop—B3: Reduce Out of Services. Here,we also considered the demand of the existing clients in the system. Highly stressed peopleusing HW services are also part of the session’s demand. Providing services to the peoplealready in the HW system indicates a further increase in the total sessions demand, whichincreases HW Service Staff as the capacity increase, forming the first reinforcing loop—R1:Adjust HW Service Capacity. Prioritizing services to people indicates a decrease in theremaining capacity, creating the fourth balancing loop—B4: Prioritize Existing Clients.Systems 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 30   loop—R1: Adjust HW Service Capacity. Prioritizing services to people indicates a de-crease in the remaining capacity, creating the fourth balancing loop—B4: Prioritize Exist-ing Clients.   Figure 4. Health and well-being service provision. Note: ‘R’ represents ‘reinforcing’ loops, meaning that an increase (decrease) of one variable would trigger an increase (decrease) of this variable after travelling the full loop. 4.4. Organizational Resilience in the Environment Aside from the health service sector mentioned above, another critical factor that con-nects individuals’ and organizations’ resilience is how the surrounding environment and organizations can mitigate the adversities and disturbances that individuals face. Multiple crisis events are “environmental jolts” that potentially bring opportunities for organiza-tional transformation, which might also create disturbances for individuals. With “crisis shocks” in the system, the average number of disturbance events increases, increasing the number of people experiencing increased stressing.  In this model, we used the stock of Environment Temporary Adjustments to describe the organization’s attempts to provide solutions (see Figure 5). Increasing disturbance events requires organizations such as workplaces to accommodate the events and increase temporary adjustments, which increases the disturbance events that individuals need to adjust to, forming the second reinforcing loop—R2: Temporary Environmental Disturb-ance. Environment Temporary Adjustments are settled and moved to the stock of Stabilized Adjustments, forming the fifth balancing loop—B5: Long-term Stabilization. For example, vaccination programs, work-from-home guidelines, and traveling notices formed some of the stabilized adjustments during the COVID-19 pandemic. Environment Stabilized Adjust-ments could be revisited after a specific time in multiple shocks, being moved to Temporary Adjustments. i re 4. ealt a ell-being service provision. Note: ‘R’ represents ‘reinforcing’ loops, meani gthat an increase (decrease) of one variable would trigger an increase (decrease) of this variable aftertravelling the full loop.. . i ti al esilience in the Environmentsi e fr t e health service sector mentioned above, another critical factor thatconnects individuals’ and organizations’ resilience is how the surrounding environmentand organizations can mitigate the adversities and disturbances that individuals face.Multiple crisis events are “environmental jolts” that potentially bring opportunities fororganizational transformation, which might also create disturbances for individuals. WithSystems 2022, 10, 183 9 of 29“crisis shocks” in the system, the average number of disturbance events increases, increasingthe number of people experiencing increased stressing.In this model, we used the stock of Environment Temporary Adjustments to describe theorganization’s attempts to provide solutions (see Figure 5). Increasing disturbance eventsrequires organizations such as workplaces to accommodate the events and increase tempo-rary adjustments, which increases the disturbance events that individuals need to adjust to,forming the second reinforcing loop—R2: Temporary Environmental Disturbance. Environ-ment Temporary Adjustments are settled and moved to the stock of Stabilized Adjustments,forming the fifth balancing loop—B5: Long-term Stabilization. For example, vaccinationprograms, work-from-home guidelines, and traveling notices formed some of the stabilizedadjustments during the COVID-19 pandemic. Environment Stabilized Adjustments could berevisited after a specific time in multiple shocks, being moved to Temporary Adjustments.Systems 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 30    Figure 5. Organizational resilience in the environment. In Figure 6, we present an overview of the main causal mechanisms and the inter-connections between four sectors that we described. Figure 5. Organizational resilience in the environment.In Figure 6, we present an overview of the main causal mechanisms and the intercon-nections between four sectors that we described.Systems 2022, 10, 183 10 of 29+- ++-++-+- +++++--+-+-++-++++++++--++-+-+++++---+++Low/mildStress PeopleEnvironmentStabilizedAdjustmentsHighly StressedPeoplewithoutHW ServicesPsychologicalResilienceHWService StaffDisturbanceEventsHighly StressedPeoplewithHW ServicesEnvironmentTemporaryAdjustmentsRecovering by using servicesTime needed toresolve eventsTime to self-recoverAverage disturbanceevents per monthEffect of individual resilienceon processing disturbancesDecreasingdisturbance eventsTotal monthlysessioncapacityEnvironmentadjustingEnvironmentstabilizingUsing servicesDisturbance to temporaryadjustments ratioPerceiveddisturbances in systemTime needed tosettle stabilized adjustmentsTime needed to developtemporary adjustmentsTotal number ofadjustments neededIncreasingdisturbance eventsTotal sessions demandTime to recoverRemaining monthlysessions capacityWaiting timeEnvironmentstabilizationDisturbance to resilience ratioResilience AdjustingChanges ofemployeeTime to hireSelf-recoveringEffect of environmentalresilience on decreasingdisturbance eventsDropping	out	servicesDeveloping tolerance of emotional distressthrough recovering processStressing upRe-adjustingTime needed forrevisiting adjustmentsTime to changestress levelOrganizationresponse timeResilience neededto address disturbance eventsFraction of dropping outAdjustments gapLong-term	StabilizationB5TemporaryEnvironmentalDisturbancesR2Resilience	HelpsProcess	DisturbancesB1b	Resilience	PreventsDisturbancesB1aPrioritize	ExistingClientsB4Reduce	Out	ofServicesB3Gain	Resiliencethrough	Self-RecoveryB2aAdjust	HW	ServiceCapacityR1Gain	Resilience	throughService	RecoveryB2bHealth & Wellbeing Service Sector ResilienceIndividual Psychological ResilienceOrganisational Resilience in Environment Resilience and Disturbance InterconnectionsMultiple Shocks to the systemFigure 6. Stock and flow structure of the resilience model. The red box highlights the impact ofmultiple shocks to the system.5. Model ResultsThe simulation model had a 200-month time horizon. In this section, we describethe model equilibrium conditions and how the model responds to different scenarios ofmultiple shocks.5.1. Model EquilibriumWe initialized the model in equilibrium without any shocks to the system. The modelequations are included in Appendix A. With an average of 2.5 disturbance events happeningevery month, the psychological resilience remained 0.6 throughout the model’s runningtime of 200 months. The number of temporary adjustments remained the same as theadjustments demanded by the disturbance events, leaving the disturbance to temporaryadjustments ratio at 1. The environmental stabilization ratio remained 0.23, indicatingthat the environment was stable in providing support. The model was initialized withSystems 2022, 10, 183 11 of 2912,300 people, with 10,000 people having low/mild stress, 1.74k people not using HWservices, and 543 highly stressed people using HW services. The mental health services had57 staff throughout the model running time, providing 5700 sessions monthly to supportthe population’s health and well-being.5.2. Multiple Shocks in the Base RunFor the base run, we simulated the model with three consecutive shocks with equalintensities and durations. The model’s time horizon was 200 months, while the shocksonly presented in the initial 60 months, which is less than one-third of the running time.The reason is that a long time horizon can show the long-term impact and the processfor the system to regain steady status. Each shock lasted five months, with an intervalof six months and an equal intensity of three. The three shocks from month 20 to month47 indicate that there were approximately two years of elevated disturbance, ensuring theinvestigation of the long-term impacts. A shock intensity of three increased the number ofdisturbances of events to 10 events per month. The first shock started by month 20. Figure 7shows that the number of highly stressed people without HW services rose to 4200 bymonth 26.5, which shows that the peak of the first wave shocks had a 6.5-month delay. Themaximum number of highly stressed people was a third of the total population. The nexttwo waves displayed the same delays as the first wave. The peak of highly stressed peoplewithout HW services remained the same as in the first wave in the second wave, and thendecreased to 3240 in the third wave. The psychological resilience ratio increased over thethree consecutive shocks from 0.63 to 0.66, indicating that people recovering from usingHW services or self-recovery gained tolerance toward the same intensity and duration ofshock, increasing the population’s resilience to future shocks. The psychological resilienceratio describes the general trend and changes in psychological resilience. The impact of themultiple shocks on the system lasted for the remaining simulation time, with a relativelystable increase in highly stressed people without HW services. Overall, the number ofhighly stressed people without HW services remained lower compared to pre-multipleshocks, due to the overall improvement in psychological resilience gained from the multipleshocks. The base run showed two interesting results:• Resilience developed in multiple shocks can lower the number of highly stressedpeople without HW services compared to pre-shock conditions.• Under the scenario of three consecutive shocks with the same durations and intensities, thepsychological resilience at the population level increased over time, but was not sufficientlyhigh enough to decrease the overall risk of deterioration of health and well-being.5.3. Attenuation of Multiple ShocksIn the real world, the level of disturbances and adversities from crises varies. Toexplore the system’s response to different crisis scenarios, we changed the durations,intervals, and intensities of the three consecutive shocks. The first scenario that we wereinterested in was the “attenuation of multiple shocks,” in which the duration and intensityof the three shocks decreased over time. The first shock lasted 12 months with an intensityof six, the second shock lasted five months with an intensity of three, and the third shocklasted two months with an intensity of two. As Figure 8 shows, the number of highlystressed people without HW services increased immediately after the starting point of thefirst crisis in month 20 and kept increasing during the first wave for 10 months, reaching6720 in month 30. Afterward, the number of highly stressed people without HW servicesstarted to decline before the end of the first wave, which occurred by month 32. Toward theend of the subsequent two waves of crises, the number of highly stressed people withoutHW services reached 3090 and 1670 per month.The number of highly stressed people without HW services showed a stable decreasing-over-time pattern after the first wave, and the overall increase in psychological resiliencewas enormous compared to the base run throughout the 200 months. One of the reasonsis that the duration and intensity of the shocks to the system decreased. Another reasonSystems 2022, 10, 183 12 of 29is that the amplified first wave increased the total number of environmental adjustmentsneeded for stabilizing the environment in comparison to the base run. While it broughtmore short-term disturbances to individuals to adjust (see R2: Temporary EnvironmentalDisturbance in Figure 6), in the long run, the temporary solutions were transformed tostabilized adjustments that were relatively more sufficient to address the second and thirdwaves as the shocks to the systems were also attenuated (see B5: Long-term Stabilizationin Figure 6). Moreover, as more people experienced disturbances and adversities in thefirst wave, the recovering process increased the population’s psychological resilience byincreasing the emotional tolerance of distress and prevented individuals from becomingmore stressed when the second and third shocks happened (see B2a and B2b: Gain Re-silience through Self-recovery and Service Recovery, respectively in Figure 6). The healthservice system tried to increase the number of staff in the first significant wave, reachingapproximately 139 staff by month 36.5 (after 4.5 months of the end of the first crisis), whichwas approximately 40 more staff in the same month in comparison to the base run. Conse-quently, the maximum number of flows of people becoming more stressed was significantlylower in the second and third waves. The environment became stable, providing moretransformational adjustments throughout the crisis. The attenuation run showed anothersignificant result:• When the intensity and duration of the shocks decreased over time, the system’s rapidresponses in providing health services and environmental stabilization in the firstsignificant shock were critical in improving the population’s resilience in addressingthe risk of health and well-being deterioration in later shocks.Systems 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 30    Figure 7. Population resilience with input of three shocks. Each shock lasted five months, with an interval of six months (dashed dot pink, right axis). Two indicators of population resilience were included: The number of highly stressed people without HW services (solid black, left axis, scale: 0~8000 people) and the psychological resilience ratio (dashed dot black, left axis, scale: 0.5~1). 5.3. Attenuation of Multiple Shocks In the real world, the level of disturbances and adversities from crises varies. To ex-plore the system’s response to different crisis scenarios, we changed the durations, inter-vals, and intensities of the three consecutive shocks. The first scenario that we were inter-ested in was the “attenuation of multiple shocks,” in which the duration and intensity of the three shocks decreased over time. The first shock lasted 12 months with an intensity of six, the second shock lasted five months with an intensity of three, and the third shock lasted two months with an intensity of two. As Figure 8 shows, the number of highly stressed people without HW services increased immediately after the starting point of the first crisis in month 20 and kept increasing during the first wave for 10 months, reaching 6720 in month 30. Afterward, the number of highly stressed people without HW services started to decline before the end of the first wave, which occurred by month 32. Toward the end of the subsequent two waves of crises, the number of highly stressed people with-out HW services reached 3090 and 1670 per month. Population resilience in three equal shocksMonthsdmnl04k8k0.50.7511470 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200123123123123Base run Highly Stressed People without HW Services (people)1Base run Psychological resilience ratio (dmnl)2Base run Multiple shocks to the system (dmnl)313Figure 7. Population resilience with input of three shocks. Each shock lasted five months, with aninterval of six months (dashed dot pink, right axis). Two indicators of population resilience wereincluded: The number of highly stressed people without HW services (solid black, left axis, scale:0~8000 people) and the psychological resilience ratio (dashed dot black, left axis, scale: 0.5~1).5.4. Amplificati n of Multiple ShocksThe second scenario we were interested in was the “amplification of multiple shocks.”Th duration and intensity f the three shocks increased over time. In this scenario, weSystems 2022, 10, 183 13 of 29reversed the setting conditions of the “attenuation of multiple shocks” scenario. Here,the first shock lasted two months with an intensity of two, the second shock lasted fivemonths with an intensity of three, and the third shock lasted 12 months with an intensityof six. Figure 9 shows that the number of highly stressed people without HW services keptincreasing during the first and second waves for 10 months, reaching 4350 by month 34,which is higher than the base run. Afterward, until month 48, the number of highly stressedpeople without HW services rose exponentially to 5620 as the third shock hit the systemby month 39 for another 12 months. The number of people without HW services startedto decline from month 48, three months before the third shock ended, indicating that thestabilized solutions and HW services provided by the HW sector were effective before thethird wave ended.Systems 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 30    Figure 8. Population resilience with an input of three attenuated shocks. The shocks (right axis) are shown in dashed dot lines in pink. The first shock lasted 12 months with an intensity of six, the second shock lasted five months with an intensity of three, and the third shock lasted two months with an intensity of two. The intervals between shocks remained six months. The number of highly stressed people without HW services showed a stable decreas-ing-over-time pattern after the first wave, and the overall increase in psychological resili-ence was enormous compared to the base run throughout the 200 months. One of the reasons is that the duration and intensity of the shocks to the system decreased. Another reason is that the amplified first wave increased the total number of environmental ad-justments needed for stabilizing the environment in comparison to the base run. While it brought more short-term disturbances to individuals to adjust (see R2: Temporary Envi-ronmental Disturbance in Figure 6), in the long run, the temporary solutions were trans-formed to stabilized adjustments that were relatively more sufficient to address the sec-ond and third waves as the shocks to the systems were also attenuated (see B5: Long-term Stabilization in Figure 6). Moreover, as more people experienced disturbances and adver-sities in the first wave, the recovering process increased the population’s psychological resilience by increasing the emotional tolerance of distress and prevented individuals from becoming more stressed when the second and third shocks happened (see B2a and B2b: Gain Resilience through Self-recovery and Service Recovery, respectively in Figure 6). The health service system tried to increase the number of staff in the first significant wave, reaching approximately 139 staff by month 36.5 (after 4.5 months of the end of the first crisis), which was approximately 40 more staff in the same month in comparison to the base run. Consequently, the maximum number of flows of people becoming more stressed was significantly lower in the second and third waves. The environment became stable, providing more transformational adjustments throughout the crisis. The attenua-tion run showed another significant result: • When the intensity and duration of the shocks decreased over time, the system’s rapid responses in providing health services and environmental stabilization in the first sig-nificant shock were critical in improving the population’s resilience in addressing the risk of health and well-being deterioration in later shocks.   Population resilience in shocks attenuation scenarioMonthsdmnl04k8k0.50.7511470 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200123123123123Attenuation shocks Highly Stressed People without HW Services (people)1Attenuation shocks Psychological resilience ratio (dmnl)2Attenuation shocks Multiple shocks to the system (dmnl)3123Figure 8. Population res lience with an input of thr e attenuated shocks. The shocks (right axis) areshown in dashed dot lines in pink. The first shock lasted 12 months with an intensity of six, thesecond shock lasted five months with an intensity of three, and the third shock lasted two monthswith an intensity of two. The intervals between shocks remained six months.Changes in the sequence of primary, mild, and minor shocks resulted in chang s in thenumber of people who were stre sed. Figure 10 shows comparisons of the accumu ation ofpeople b came increasingly stressed and highly stressed people with u HW services infour runs: Equilibrium, base run, shocks attenuation, and amplification. Before mon 50,the accumulative numb r of people who became increasi gly stressed in the attenuationscenario was the highest among the four runs, as the first wave was primary, leaving6700 peopl without HW services (Figure 10b). However, from month 48 nward, theaccumulative number of people stressed in the amplification scenario was higher thanin the attenuation scenario throughout the simulation time. The outbreak of the thirdwave in the amplification scenario between months 39 and 51 left 5600 people without HWservices (Figure 10b), which is lower than the peak in the attenuation stage. However, inthe case of shock amplification, the psychological resilience and environmental stabilizationsolutions developed in the last two waves were not sufficient to prevent deterioration inthe third wave (see B1a and B1b: Resilience Prevents Disturbances and Resilience HelpsProcess Disturbances, respectively in Figure 6), the accumulative number of people withoutHW services remaining in the amplification scenario was higher in comparison to that inthe attenuation stage. After the disturbances were processed and resilience developmentSystems 2022, 10, 183 14 of 29caught up (see B2a and B2b: Gain Resilience through Self-recovery and Service Recovery,respectively, in Figure 6), the number of people who became increasingly stressed waslower than that in the equilibrium and base run. The amplification run and comparisonsleave us with a final point that:• When the intensity and duration of the shocks increased over time, while the directconsequences of the first minor and mild shocks can be relatively smaller, a higher riskof health and well-being deterioration can present in the following major shock if theresilience development process does not sufficiently prepare the system.Systems 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 30   5.4. Amplification of Multiple Shocks The second scenario we were interested in was the “amplification of multiple shocks.” The duration and intensity of the three shocks increased over time. In this sce-nario, we reversed the setting conditions of the “attenuation of multiple shocks” scenario. Here, the first shock lasted two months with an intensity of two, the second shock lasted five months with an intensity of three, and the third shock lasted 12 months with an in-tensity of six. Figure 9 shows that the number of highly stressed p ople without HW ser-vices kept increasing during the first and second waves for 10 months, reaching 4350 by month 34, which is higher than the base run. Afterward, until month 48, the nu be  of highly stressed peop e without HW services rose exponentially to 5620 as the third shock hit the system by month 39 for another 12 months. The number of people ithout HW services started to decline fro  month 48, three months before the third shock ended, indicating that the stabilized solutions and HW services provided by the HW sector were effective before the third wave ended.  Figure 9. Population resilience with input of three amplified shocks. The shocks (right axis) are shown in dashed dot line in pink. The first shock lasted two months with an intensity of two, the second shock lasts five months with an intensity of three, and the third shock lasted 12 months with an intensity of six. The intervals between shocks remained six months. Changes in the sequence of primary, mild, and minor shocks resulted in changes in the number of people who were stressed. Figure 10 shows comparisons of the accumula-tion of people became increasingly stressed and highly stressed people without HW ser-vices in four runs: Equilibrium, base run, shocks attenuation, and amplification. Before month 50, the accumulative number of people who became increasingly stressed in the attenuation scenario was the highest among the four runs, as the first wave was primary, leaving 6700 people without HW services (Figure 10b). However, from month 48 onward, the accumulative number of people stressed in the amplification scenario was higher than in the attenuation scenario throughout the simulation time. The outbreak of the third Population resilience in shocks amplification scenarioMonthsdmnl04k8k0.50.7511470 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200123123123123Amplification shocks Highly Stressed People without HW Services (people)1Amplification shocks Psychological resilience ratio (dmnl)2Amplification shocks Multiple shocks to the system (dmnl)323Figure 9. Population resilience with input of three amplified shocks. The shocks (right axis) areshown in dashed dot line in pink. The first shock lasted two months with an intensity of two, thesecond shock lasts five months with an intensity of three, and the third shock lasted 12 months withan intensity of six. The intervals between shocks remained six months.Systems 2022, 10, 183 15 of 29Systems 2022, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 30   wave in the amplification scenario between months 39 and 51 left 5600 people without HW services (Figure 10b), which is lower than the peak in the attenuation stage. However, in the case of shock amplification, the psychological resilience and environmental stabili-zation solutions developed in the last two waves were not sufficient to prevent deteriora-tion in the third wave (see B1a and B1b: Resilience Prevents Disturbances and Resilience Helps Process Disturbances, respectively in Figure 6), the accumulative number of people without HW services remaining in the amplification scenario was higher in comparison to that in the attenuation stage. After the disturbances were processed and resilience de-velopment caught up (see B2a and B2b: Gain Resilience through Self-recovery and Service Recovery, respectively, in Figure 6), the number of people who became increasingly stressed was lower than that in the equilibrium and base run. The amplification run and comparisons leave us with a final point that: • When the intensity and duration of the shocks increased over time, while the direct consequences of the first minor and mild shocks can be relatively smaller, a higher risk of health and well-being deterioration can present in the following major shock if the resilience development process does not sufficiently prepare the system.  Figure 10. Comparisons of four runs: (a) Accumulation of people becoming increasingly stressed; (b) highly stressed people without HW services. 6. Policy Testing The four runs suggest the importance of policies that develop resilience pre- and dur-ing multiple shocks of crises to decrease the risk of health and well-being deterioration. In this section, we describe how different policies can potentially reduce the number of highly stressed people without HW services in crises and increase the system’s resilience to withhold future shocks. Table 1 shows three policies and their dynamic principles and target loops. The first policy (P1) focuses on organizational adjustments—specifically, how organizations re-spond to crises and help individuals adjust to crises early when the shock hits the system. The second policy (P2) focuses on the health service sector’s response to health service demand. The third policy (P3) focuses on individual and organizational learning during crises, which can help individuals develop a higher tolerance of distress and adversities. Moreover, organizations require stabilized adjustment when there are multiple and con-secutive shocks as waves of crises.   Accumulation of people stressed upMonthsPeople035k70k0 50 100 150 20012341234 12 341234Base run1 Equilibirum 2Attenuation shocks3 Amplification shocks4Highly Stressed People without HW ServicesMonthspeople03.5k7k0 50 100 150 2001 2341 23 4123 4123 4Base run1 Equilibirum 2Attenuation shocks3 Amplification shocks4(a) (b)1 23 423 4Figure 10. Comparisons of four runs: (a) Accumulation of people becoming increasingly stressed;(b) highly stressed people without HW services.6. Policy TestingThe four runs suggest the importance f policies that develop resilience pre- andduring multiple sh cks of crises to decrease the risk of e lth and w ll-being deteri ration.In this section, w describe how different policies can potentially reduce the number ofhighly stressed people itho t services i crises a i crease the system’s resilience towithhold future shocks.Table 1 shows three policies and their dynamic principles and target loops. The firstpolicy (P1) focuses on organizational adjustments—specifically, how organizations respondto crises and help individuals adjust to crises early when the shock hits the system. Thesecond policy (P2) focuses on the health service sector’s response to health service demand.The third policy (P3) focuses on individual and organizational learning during crises,which can help individuals develop a higher tolerance of distress and adversities. Moreover,organizations require stabilized adjustment when there are multiple and consecutive shocksas waves of crises.Systems 2022, 10, 183 16 of 29Table 1. Policies for enhancing individual and organizational resilience when facing multiple crises.Policy Policy Description Dynamic Principle TargetedLoopsP1: Environment-based fastadjustmentsSpeeding up the environment’s adjustments inproviding temporary solutions. Organizationsmonitor changes, quickly respond to crises,and attempt to develop temporary plans andrevisit them quickly once the shock hits thesystem.The organizational response time is onemonth (base run is three months), thetime needed for temporary plansequals two months (base run is fourmonths), and every six months (baserun is 12 months), the organizationrevisits the plan.B2, B1a, B1bP2: Health servicesector-based fastresponsesProviding health services to support healthand well-being throughout crises. The healthservice sector responds to the demands ofhealth services quickly and provides programsto encourage the use of health services.The fraction of people reaching out tohealth and well-being services is 0.8(base run is 0.5). The waiting time toaccess these services equals twomonths (base run is four months), andthe time to hire new staff is now threemonths (base run is 12 months).R1, B3, B4, B2b,B1a, B1bP3: CollectivegrowthFacilitating organizations’ and individuals’evolvement and adjustment for long-termstabilization in crises. Specifically, individualsdevelop more resilience in tolerating distressand adversities through self-recovery andusing health services. Moreover, organizationscan provide stabilized adjustments (such asguidelines, arrangements, long-term strategies,and solutions) more quickly in crises.The emotional tolerance acquired fromthe recovery process is four times thatof the original baseline, which is now 4(base run is 1), and the time fororganizations to settle theirstabilization adjustment is now threemonths (base run is 12 months).B2a, B2b, B5,B1a, B1bFigure 11a shows the accumulation of people becoming increasingly stressed, whichis the sum of the flow “becoming increasingly stressed” over the 200 months. The accu-