The Urgency of Waqf in the Agrarian Reform Agenda as a Form of Post-Covid 19 Economic Recovery

ELEHICThe Third Economic, Law, Education and Humanities International ConferenceVolume 2023Conference paperThe Urgency of Waqf in the Agrarian ReformAgenda as a Form of Post-Covid 19 EconomicRecoveryFitri Rafianti*1, Onny Medaline2, dan Rahmad Sembiring31Universitas Pembangunan Panca Budi, Jl.Gatot Subroto KM.4,5 Medan, Indonesia2Universitas Muhamadiyah Sumatera Utara, Jl. Denai No.217, Tegal Sari Mandala II, Kec. MedanDenai, Kota Medan, Sumatera Utara, Indonesia3Universitas Pembangunan Panca Budi, Jl.Gatot Subroto KM.4,5 Medan, IndonesiaAbstract.Waqf is one of the instruments to overcome social and economic problems, meanwhile,agrarian reform is one of the programs that have access to land and is somethingfundamental for socio-economic development, poverty reduction for handling theCovid- 19 pandemic that has hit the world, especially Indonesia, handling the pandemicrequires strategic and clear goals, as illustrated in the design of the concept of AgrarianReform. This paper aims to analyze the urgency of waqf in the Agrarian Reform agendaas a form of economic recovery after the Covid-19 pandemic. The method used in thisstudy is the Research and development method The results of the study show that inIndonesia the utilization of waqf to overcome economic problems after the Covid-19pandemic is still not optimal, but waqf has great potential in providing facilities forsupport economic recovery the urgency of waqf is also appropriate with its needs andfunctions in the concept of economic recovery in the SHAT (Sertifikat Hak Atas Tanah)program which encourages the rise of MSMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises ) in acooperation program built by the ministry.Keywords: Waqf, Agrarian Reform, Economic Recovery, Post-Covid-191. INTRODUCTIONLooking back at the complex problems regarding land in Indonesia ranging fromresource control, laws, economic strategies, and formal institutions that systematicallyremove rural communities from controlling land and other resources. In other words,a limping agrarian order or structure is created. Where most of the natural resourcesand land are controlled by large capital actors and are utilized according to the logicof market dynamics for their own maximum benefit Agrarian conflicts that arise due todifferences in perceptions and interests concerning these natural resources and land,by themselves it can only be solved by making a fairly fundamental change to theAgrarian Reform approach but from some of the basic principles of agrarian reform it isalso unable to accelerate rapidly to support the economic recovery of the communityHow to cite this article: Fitri Rafianti*, Onny Medaline, dan Rahmad Sembiring, (2023), “The Urgency of Waqf in the Agrarian Reform Agenda asa Form of Post-Covid 19 Economic Recovery” in The Third Economic, Law, Education and Humanities International Conference, KnE Life Sciences,pages 23–31. DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13741Page 23Corresponding Author: FitriRafianti; email:fitrirafianti@dosen.pancabudi.ac.idPublished 24 July 2023Publishing services provided byKnowledge EFitri Rafianti et al. This articleis distributed under the terms ofthe Creative CommonsAttribution License, whichpermits unrestricted use andredistribution provided that theoriginal author and source arecredited.Selection and Peer-review underthe responsibility of the ELEHICConference Committee.ELEHICas we know that we have just been hit by a big storm called the Covid-19 outbreakthat devastated our economy, for this reason, the author feels it is very important todo to support the concept of waqf as an alternative economic recovery, together withthe program of the Ministry of Agrarian Affairs and the Ministry of Religion through theconcept of waqf land in supporting the agrarian reform program.The COVID-19 pandemic that occurred in Indonesia had a fairly serious impact andcaused a lot of unrest in the community. This is because people lost their income, wherebefore this pandemic, people could carry out economic and business activities normally,but after Covid-19, there were many restrictions carried out by the government so thatwhich caused the average income from the community to tend to decrease or no incomereceived, Therefore, if allowed to continue the economic conditions in Indonesia will befurther deteriorated and the poverty rate in Indonesia will be higher. This is evidencedby BPS data that the percentage of Indonesia’s poor population in semester 1 of 2019of 9.41 percent increased to 10.19 percent in semester 2 of 2020 1Waqf utilization is an activity to reduce poverty by restoring the economy throughwaqf, waqf has a usefulness as a planner, implementer, and coordination of supervisionwith the aim of collecting, distributing, and utilizing waqf. These activities have beenregulated in Law Number 41 of 2004 concerning Waqf and are carried out by theIndonesian Waqf Board (BWI).2 According to the cleric, the funds represented areallowed to be managed for the benefit of the people, Then, in its management, it isnot the same as the management of zakat or sadaqah in general. Waqf managers canmaintain waqf assets as a whole but are seeking to be developed so that they are able toprovide good and optimal output tomauquf alaih.3 According to the commissioner of theIndonesian Waqf Agency (BWI) for advocacy and institutional affairs, Iwan AgustiawanFuad, currently many waqf lands are not productive, so the role of waqf in the pandemicis still not optimal compared to zakat whose distribution is directly.41 https://www.bps.go.id2 Aziz, Muhammad. 2017. Peran Badan Wakaf Indonesia (BWI) Dalam Mengem-bangkan Prospek Wakaf Uang Di Indonesia. JES ( Jurnal Ekonomi Syariah) 2 (1): 3554.https://doi.org/10.30736/jesa.v2i1.14.3Miftkhuddin, M dkk, https://ejournal.stiesyariahbengkalis.ac.id/index.php/iqtishadunaJuni 2021, Vol.10, No.1: 76-904 Handayani, Rossi. 2020. —Peran Wakaf Belum Optimal Tangani Pandemi Covid19. Republika. 2020. https://www.republika.co.id/berita/q9stx3327/peranwakaf-belum-optimal-tangani-pandemi-covid-DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13741 Page 24ELEHICBased on some of the facts above, the researcher sees several literary writingsfrom previous researchers who have close ties to waqf and agrarian reform includingsetyo Utomo (2021) The Journey of Agrarian Reform Part of the Mandate of the StateConstitution of Miftakhuddin (2021) the use of waqf instruments in themidst of the Covid-19 pandemic in the perspective of maqashid sharia, Ahmad Hatim (2021) Reform of theRole of the Indonesian Waqf Agency (BWI) in the National Waqf Ecosystem as a Pathto Agrarian Reform. Although there have been many studies that explore Waqaf andagrarian reform, there is no writing that specifically examines the urgency of waqaf in theconcept of agrarian as a form of economic recovery so that it can be used as a loopholein research. This paper aims to strengthen the research of Waqf Land CertificationThrough Agrarian Reform Principles To Realize Social Welfare In North Sumatra whichraises the theory of social welfare as a basis for thinking where the state of prosperity isinterpreted as the improvement and eradication of certain social ugliness, but it is also astate and activity, which shows regulations in agrarian reform, especially land registrationwhich is specifically for waqf land governance in North Sumatra is the design of a waqfland governance model that refers to Land Certification, not only realizing welfare, butwill also reduce the occurrence of conflicts and land disputes in Indonesia, where withthe reduction of land conflicts, agrarian reform can be resolved optimally which is greatlyaffected by welfare which can be interpreted as welfare is an implementation and as aform of economic recovery.2. METHODOLOGY/ MATERIALSResearch methods used with a research and development approach carried out toelements of legal subjects related to waqf management include; Officials of the Office ofReligious Affairs, nazir of waqf land, The IndonesianWaqf Agency (BWI), the Office of theNational Land Agency (BPN). which was sampled based on the waqf land governancemodel based on the Agrarian Reform Principle in an effort to achieve economic recovery2.1. Waqaf and some of its meaningsAccording to Abu Hanifah Waqf is to hold an object that, according to the law, remainsin the wakif to use its benefits for virtue. Based on that definition, the ownership of waqfproperty cannot be separated from the wakif, in fact, he is justified in withdrawing itand he can sell it. Meanwhile, the Maliki School argues that the waqf does not releasethe waqf property from the ownership of the wakif, but the waqf prevents the wakifDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13741 Page 25ELEHICfrom taking actions that can relinquish its ownership of the property to others and thewakif is obliged to endow its benefits and must not withdraw the waqf.5 Imam Shafi’Iand Ahmad argued that waqf is to release the waqf property from the ownership ofthe wakif, after the perfect procedure of waqf. The Wakif must not do anything to theproperty that is represented, such as the treatment of the owner by means of ownershipto others, whether by exchange or not. If the waqf wakif, the waqf property cannot beinherited by the heir. The wakif distributes the use of the property he represents to themauquf’alaih (who is given the waqf) as binding almsgiving, where the wakif cannotprohibit the distribution of his donations. If the wakif forbids it, then Qadli has the rightto force him to give it to the mauquf’alaih Therefore, the Shafi’i school defines waqfas: ”not to perform an action on an object, which has the status of belonging to AllahAlmighty, by endowing its benefits to a (social) virtual.65 Ibid6 Ibid2.2. Landreform dan Reforma agraria.Land reform as part of Indonesia’s five agrarian reform programs in its existence expe-rienced various typologies, in the era of Soekarno’s rule known as ”Land reform”, in theSoeharto era ”transmigration”, in the era Habibie ”Agrarian renewal” until the Gusdurera”, in the era SBY ”National Agrarian Renewal program (PPAN) or popularly known asAgrarian Reform and continued in the era of the Jokowi-JK administration During thetime of President Joko Widodo, Agaria Reform became a National Priority program bygiving birth to a policy in the form of Presidential Regulation No. 86 of 2018 concerningAgrarian Reform of the National Program which includes six aspects, namely:1. Strengthening the regulatory framework and resolving agrarian conflicts2. Structuring the control and ownership of land objects of agrarian reform3. Legal certainty and legalization of land rights to the object of agrarian reform4. Community empowerment in the use, utilization, and production of land objectsof agrarian reform5. Allocation of forest resources to be managed by the community, as well as6. Implementing institutions of central and regional agrarian reform.77. Agrarian reform is a program formed in order to reorganize the structure of landcontrol that is more just which is expected to be able to create equality and justiceDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13741 Page 26ELEHICin land ownership so that it can improve welfare for all layers community. Thus, inessence, the concept of agrarian reform includes 3 concepts, namely:8(a) Land reform concept, namely the realignment of a fairer land ownershipstructure(b) The concept of access reform is related to the arrangement of more productiveland use or utilization accompanied by the arrangement of support for facilitiesand infrastructure that allow farmers to gain access to economic resourcesin rural areas. These accesses include access to agricultural facilities andinfrastructure, irrigation, roads, farming, production marketing, farm businesscooperatives, and banking (people’s business credit)(c) The concept of Policy/Regulationreform, which is related to policy and legalarrangements that favor the people3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONWaqaf As one of the religious instruments of economic value and social dimensions, therepresentation of land is a logical consequence in the system of ownership in Islam. Thepossession of the property in Islam must be accompanied by moral responsibility. Allthat is in the heavens and on this earth belongs to God. Human ownership of propertyis a mere mandate or entrustment, so everything against this waqf must be empoweredas well as possible with good methods and regulations, one of which is through theconcept of Agrarian Reform.The implementation of agrarian reform gives an idea that agrarian reform will not onlyachieve a form of legal certainty in land tenure and ownership for the community7 Kantor Staf Presiden 2017, Pelaksanaan Reforma Agraria, arahan Kantor StafPresiden: Prioritas nasional Reforma Agraria dalam Rencana Kerja Pemerintah Tahun20178 Ben Cousins, Agrarian Reform and The Two Econimies: Transforming SouthAfrica’s4 Countryside, draft of chapter 9 in Ruth Hall and Laungisile Ntsebeza, eds., TheLand Question in SouthAfrica: The Challenge of Transformation and Redistribution, HSRC Press,Cape Town,South Africa, 2007, hal. 30but is also expected to achieve the goal of community welfare in the form of economicimprovement in the advanced program of land management. For this reason, thereDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13741 Page 27ELEHICshould be a balance in the implementation of asset and access arrangements so thatthe objectives of agrarian reform can be carried out optimally.9Currently, the government through the Ministry of Agrarian and Spatial Planninghas made various improvements to land administration, including by creating a landdatabase, so that people can easily access the data, asset management is carriedout through the redistribution of agricultural and non-agricultural land, while assetlegalization is carried out through land certification. Asset structuring is the basisfor structuring access, where asset structuring consists of land restitution and assetlegalization while access structuring is carried out on a cluster basis in order to increaseeconomies of scale, and added value and encourages entrepreneurial innovation in thesubject of Agrarian Reform.The concept of economic recovery in the order of agrarian reform is carried outin the presence of a land timekeeping program. The government is synergizing theLand Rights Certificate Empowerment Program (SHAT), by providing assistance thatwill be able to support the productivity of MSME actors who want to establish theirbusinesses. The SHAT Empowerment Program is organized under the coordination ofthe Coordinating Ministry for Economic Affairs and through cooperation with the Ministryof Agrarian and Spatial Planning / National Land Agency (ATR / BPN), the Ministry ofCooperatives and SMEs, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Marine Affairs andFisheries, and the Regency Government, with financial institutions distributing KURincluding, BRI Syariah, and BNI Syariah. Through this program, it can be expectedto improve the legal status of land rights of small and micro enterprises, increaseaccessibility to obtaining credit and financing from banks/cooperatives, and ultimatelyincrease the capital and welfare of small and medium enterprises. Here is one of thedata that can be used as a sample of the form of economic recovery in the classificationof some of the land in the city of Binjai.9 Kartiwi & Hasyim, (2019). Implementasi Kebijakan Pemerintah Di Bidang Pendaf-taran Tanah Sistematis Lengkap di Kabupaten Garut. Jurnal Ilmu Sosial Politik DanHumaniora, 2(2), 43–53. https://doi.org/10.36624/jisora.v2i2.45. Hal. 4410 https://lintor.atrbpn.go.id/Target, diakses tgl 26 April 2022, pkl 10.26 WIB.Based on the data above, it is explained that of the 45 files registered for the Cross-Sectoral, Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) program in the working area of theBinjai City Land Office, which includes 11 villages/kelurahan, which was helped as aresult of the community’s economic recovery. Looking at the data above, it is time forthe waqf empowerment program to be intensified to actualize the potential of waqf tobe more economically efficient so that Muslims in Indonesia are not only proud of theDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13741 Page 28ELEHICTable 1: Land Registration Target Data on SME Cross-Sectoral Programs In the Working Area of the BinjaiCity Land Office10No Desa/ Kelurahan Target Berkas PBT SU1 Jati Utomo 7 7 7 72 Cengkeh Turi 1 1 1 13 Jati Karya 3 3 3 34 Jati Makmur 3 3 3 35 Damai 1 1 1 16 Pahlawan 2 2 2 27 Sumber Karya 4 4 4 48 Sumber Muliorejo 6 6 6 69 Berngam 16 16 16 1610 Tanah Merah 1 1 1 111 Puji Dadi 1 1 1 1Total 45 45 45 45extraordinary area of waqf assets, but feel the benefits of managing waqf property thatis produced as a form of implementation of waqf as one of the agrarian reform programsthat have value for economic recovery after the Covid-19 pandemic.However, the matter of controversy in terms of waqf in the concept of agrarian as aform of economic recovery is not followed by elements of man, machine, money, andmethods that do not have a significant effect. However, when viewed from the materialelement, it turns out that there are quite a lot of factors that affect and are interrelatedwith each other, including in the fulfillment of the completeness of the file by Nazir, whenthe creation of AIW is not immediately carried out or only verbally, it can cause obstaclesto the making of AIW (Deed of Waqf Pledge)/APAIW (Deed of Replacement for WaqfPledge) ). Limited knowledge of the procedures and conditions of the representation.People’s mindset regarding land tenure is that physical tenure is more believed thandocuments. The role of the village/kelurahan is considered to be less prioritized for waqfland in land registration activities through PTSL (Complete Systematic Land Registration)plus the KUA as PPAIW who does not know that this PTSL program can also be usedto register waqf lands and the uneven understanding and new paradigm of waqf in themidst of the community in accordance with the provisions of the new waqf legislation.Therefore, socialization efforts are needed through various media, both directly andindirectly.DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13741 Page 29ELEHIC4. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONBased on some of the above, several strategies are needed to increase the ghirohof the nadzhirs and waqf land managers to think more creatively and productively forenrichment and empowerment to empower waqf land as a treasure of the people.Some of them can be done by mapping potential waqf lands that contain a higheconomic value, making proposals for the empowerment of waqf land, Establishingpartnerships for efforts to empower waqf land, improving the quality of nazir’s reliableand quality human resources, and professional modern management. all of which mustbe accompanied by professional and structured control. With systematic calculations foreconomic recovery, finally, waqf in the concept of agrarian reform can really be felt inthe impact and benefits to recover from the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic outbreak.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSFinally, the author would like to express his infinite gratitude to the beloved Institution ofPanca Budi Medan Development University, to the Management Of the Faculty of SocialSciences, Dean, Head of Study Program, and all Colleagues, Mrs. Dr. Onny Medaline,SH., MKn, Mrs. Dr. Siti Nurhayati and Mr. Dr. Rahmat Sembiring, SE., M.SP as researchteam colleagues.References[1] Aziz, Muhammad. 2017. Peran Badan Wakaf Indonesia (BWI) Dalam Mengem-bangkan Prospek Wakaf Uang Di Indonesia. JES ( Jurnal Ekonomi Syariah) 2 (1):35 54.https://doi.org/10.30736/jesa.v2i1.14.[2] Miftkhuddin, M dkk, https://ejournal.stiesyariahbengkalis.ac.id/index.php/iqtishaduna[3] Handayani, Rossi. 2020. Peran Wakaf Belum Optimal Tangani Pandemi Covid 19.Republika. 2020. https://www.republika.co.id/berita/q9stx3327/peranwakaf- belum-optimal-tangani-pandemi-covid-19[4] setyo Utomo (2021) Perjalanan Reforma Agraria Bagian Dari Amanah KonstitusiNegara[5] https://journal.unpar.ac.id/index.php/veritas/article/view/3935/3408 diakses 25[6] september 2022 pukul 20.42 WibDOI 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13741 Page 30ELEHIC[7] M.Miftakhuddin (2021) pendayagunaan instrumen wakaf di tengah pandemi covid-19 dalam perspektif maqashid syariah[8] Hatim, A. (2021). Reformasi Peran Badan Wakaf Indonesia (BWI) dalam EkosistemWakaf Nasional sebagai Jalan Menuju Reforma Agraria. Jurnal Hukum LexGeneralis, Available https://doi.org/10.56370/jhlg.v2i9.124https://www.bwi.go.id[9] M. Nazir Salim, Reforma Agraria: Kelembagaan Dan Praktik Kebijakan, STPNPress,2020, Yogyakarta[10] Kantor Staf Presiden 2017, Pelaksanaan Reforma Agraria, arahan Kantor StafPresiden: Prioritas nasional Reforma Agraria dalam Rencana Kerja Pemerintah Tahun2017[11] Onny Medaline, dkkWaqf Land Certification Through Agrarian Reform Principles ToRealize SocialWelfare In North Sumatra, The Seybold Report, Vol 17 No 9 September2022[12] Ben Cousins, Agrarian Reform and The Two Econimies: Transforming South Africa’sCountryside, draft of chapter 9 in Ruth Hall and Laungisile Ntsebeza, eds., The LandQuestion in South Africa: The Challenge of Transformation and Redistribution, HSRCPress,Cape Town, South Africa, 2007[13] Kartiwi & Hasyim, (2019). Implementasi Kebijakan PemerintahDi Bidang PendaftaranTanah Sistematis Lengkap di Kabupaten Garut. Jurnal Ilmu Sosial[14] Politik Dan Humaniora, 2(2), 43–53. https://doi.org/10.36624/jisora.v2i2.45.[15] Okezone.com, Hore, Sertifikat Tanah untuk Pelaku UMKM Dipermudah,Availablehttps://economy.okezone.com/read/2020/10/12/470/2292492/hore-sertifikat-tanah-untuk-pelaku-umkm-dipermudah[16] https://lintor.atrbpn.go.id/Target, diakses tgl 26 April 2022, pkl 10.26 WIB.DOI 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13741 Page 31