Measuring resilience to economic shocks: an application to Spain

Measuring resilience to economic shocks: an application to Spain 
 
Angulo AM, Mur J, Trívez FJ 
Universidad de Zaragoza 
Gran Vía 2, 50.005 Zaragoza 
 
Corresponding author: Angulo AM (aangulo@unizar.es) 
 
Abstract 
 
In this paper, we evaluate Spanish regions’ resistance to the economic crisis under three 
main resilience notions: “Adaptative”, “Engineering” and “Ecological”. “Adaptative” resilience 
is measured through a traditional shift-share approach applied to employment, whereas 
“Engineering” and “Ecological” resilience pay attention to growth path and total employment 
level, in the pre- and post-crisis period. The paper presents an application of the different notion 
of resilience to the case of Spanish provinces in the last years. We find that provinces with 
sectoral structure and location advantages, or those with locational advantages in the post-crisis 
period (according to the “Adaptative” resilience measure), exhibit a significantly lower “drop” 
in growth (according to the “Engineering” and “Ecological” resilience measure). Furthermore, 
we conclude that the probability of presenting a better behavior (lower “drop” in growth than 
the average) increases for those regions specialized in the service sector before the crisis. As 
expected, the worse behavior has corresponds to those regions specialized in the pre-crisis 
period in the construction sector.  
 
Keywords: “Adaptative”, “Engineering” and “Ecological” resilience, shift-share analyses, 
spatial panel data model, specialization. 
JEL Classification: C21; C22; C23; C53; R15. 
 
Acknowledgement 
The authors are grateful for the financial support of the Spanish Government’s Ministry 
of Economy and Competitiveness (ECO2015-65758-P), as well as for the financial 
support of the Department of Industry and Innovation of Aragon Government and the 
European Fund of Regional Development through the GAEC group. 
1 
 
Measuring resilience to economic shocks: an application to Spain 
 
1. Introduction 
Recent literature has popularized the term “resilience” which refers to the ability of a 
local socio-economic system to recover from a shock or disruption as could be financial 
crises, epidemics, natural disasters, etc. Foster (2007) defines regional resilience as “the 
ability of a region to anticipate, prepared for, respond to, and recover from a disturbance”. 
Similarly, Hill et al. (2008) define resilience as “the ability of a region… to recover 
successfully from shocks to its economy that either throw it off its growth path or have the 
potential to throw it off its growth path.  
In the cases of shocks like economic and environmental crises, because of their global 
and interconnected character, spatial economics turns to be very useful for the assessment of 
regional resilience. A nice literature revision on this topic can be found in Modica and 
Reggiani (2015). 
Two main resilience notions, known as “Engineering” and “Ecological” resilience, are 
depicted in Figure 1. “Engineering” resilience (Figure 1a) relates to regional economic 
rebound. The only requisite for this category is the return to the pre-existing position or to the 
path it would have been in the absence of the shock. In this view, recessionary shocks should 
be transitory, and should have no permanent effect on the economy’s long-run growth ceiling 
or growth trend. Hence, the focus of this approach is on resistance to shocks and stability near 
equilibrium.  
(Insert Figure 1) 
“Ecological” resilience measures the shock that can be absorbed before the system 
changes its form, function or position (Holling, 1973, 1996, 2001; McGlade et al., 2006; 
Walker et al., 2006). This approach is related to the concept of “hysteresis”, which is defined 
as a situation where disturbances permanently affect the path of the economy (Romer, 2001). 
Hence, “Ecological” resilience is measured by comparing pre-shock and post-shock (stable) 
state. More precisely, if the situation of certain economy after a shock is “worse” than its 
position before the shock, then it presents low resilience or negative hysteresis. These are the 
cases depicted in Figures 1b and Figures 1c. Figure 1b represents a recession that permanently 
lowers the level of employment or output, although the region’s growth rate recovers its pre-
shock rate (the region’s economy is able to resume its pre-recession growth rate, but on a 
2 
 
permanently lowered trend path). Figure 1c shows the case where both, the region’s level of 
output or employment, and its post-shock growth rate, is lowered. In the opposite side, we 
will refer to high “Ecological” resilience to shocks, or positive hysteresis, if after a 
recessionary shock the economy is able to move to a “superior” state. Some examples are 
depicted in Figures 1d and 1e. In both cases, the regional economy more than “rebounds” 
from the recessionary downturn, and initially experiences rapid growth out of the recession, at 
a rate above the pre-shock growth rate. However, while in the case of Figure 1d growth rate 
resumes to pre-recession level, in the case of Figure 1e the recovery takes place to a sustained 
higher growth rate.  
In this context, Martin (2012) coined a third resilience term, called “Adaptative” 
resilience, in reference to the capacity of a region to reconfigure itself; that is, to adapt its 
structure (firms, industries, technologies and institutions) so as to maintain an acceptable 
growth path in employment, output or wealth over time. It is assumed that after a recession, a 
region will be high/low “Adaptative” resilient depending on its ability to develop 
higher/lower productive sectors than those swept away by the recession.  
Literature has integrated the three resilience notions. Modica and Reggiani (2015) 
indicate that “Engineering resilience” seems more related to conventional global stability 
theory while “Adaptative” resilience can be conceived as an insightful interpretation of 
“Ecological” resilience. Nevertheless, there remains a lot of work to be done. For instance, 
Martin (2012), and Martin and Sunley (2015) claim for clearer definitions, whereas Modica 
and Reggiani (2015) ask for a more consistent analytical framework to achieve a clear 
understanding and representation of the evolutionary of spatial economic processes 
(“Ecological resilience”1). 
The severe consequences of the recent crisis that has hit the World economy, and the 
Spanish in particular, has been our main motivation. In this context, this paper aims two 
objectives. First, we pursue to get insight into consistent analytical framework to determine 
whether a specific (Spanish) region present low or high resilience. Second, after classifying 
the provinces into categories according to resilience to recent downturn, we try to derive more 
general conclusion about how the three notions are related. To accomplish this goal, various 
probit models are estimated to measure whether well-behaved (wrong behaved) regions, in 
                                                          
1 “Ecological” resilience is related to evolutionary theories, which consider the region as the result of 
social interactions subject to a process of transition and time is considered a flow.   
3 
 
terms of “Adaptative” resilience, are likely to be also well-behaved (wrong behaved) under 
the two other resilience notions. Our conclusion in this point is that the results for each notion 
must be understood under the framework under which they have been derived. However, in 
general, they are related: the best behaved regions under the “Adaptative” resilience notion 
are also the most likely to behave properly in term of the “Engineering” /“Ecological” 
perspectives. 
The methodological approach to resilience range from descriptive, interpretative case 
studies to sophisticated statically and econometric models. Among them, we can find case 
studies such as Evans and Karecha (2013); simple indices, such as Martin (2012) or 
Augustine et al. (2013); statistical time series models as in Fingleton et al. (2012); and finally, 
causal structural models, such as Doran and Fingleton (2013) or Fingleton and Palombi 
(2013). In our proposal, we are going to approach the “Adaptative” notion of resilience 
through two shift-share analyses (one for the pre-crisis period, the other for the post-crisis 
period). Moreover, “Engineering”/“Ecological” resilience will be measured, following 
Fingleton and Palombi (2013) by comparing the counterfactual (or projected) annual growth 
rate of employment in absent of the economic crisis with the actual ones2. 
Empirical evidence is obtained from quarterly employment provincial data in the four 
main economic sectors (agriculture, industry, construction and services), for the period 
2002:1-2015:4 in Spain. Before launching this study, we have to estimate the time of the 
shock for the Spanish economy, which is in the second quarter of 2008, 2008:2. Then, as 
regards “Adaptative” resilience, we derive two shift-share analyses to conclude on regional 
behavior before and after the shock. From Industrial Mix (IM) and Regional Share (RS) 
components, regions are classified among categories I to IV (from best to worst behavior) 
before and after the crisis. Furthermore, the specialization pattern before and after the crisis is 
also obtained. According to this approach, a region will be considered high resilient if it has 
maintained, or even improved, its performance after the shock through a sectoral 
restructuration. Results show that some provinces such as Malaga, A Coruña, Lugo, 
Gipzzkoa, Palencia or Madrid, among others, can be considered high resilient within this 
perspective. 
                                                          
2 Nevertheless, our counterfactual predictions are obtained through a different process that that 
proposed in Fingleton and Palombi (2013). 
4 
 
Concerning “Engineering”/“Ecological” resilience, we will pay attention to both total 
employment growth and level of employment in the pre- and post-crisis periods. Since the 
shock for the Spanish economy is identified in 2008:2, we estimate a panel data model for the 
pre-shock period for the annual growth rate of total employment. Afterwards, using these 
estimates, we forecast total employment growth rates for the Spanish provinces for the post-
crisis period. The predicted values for each province represent the counterfactual (or 
projected) annual growth rate of employment, in absence of the economic crisis. The idea is 
that forecasted values purged of the effect of the shock3. Finally, we measure the effect of the 
crisis by comparing forecasted and actual values. According to these differences, the 
“Engineering” notion classifies a province as high resilient only when its actual employment 
growth and level are statistically the same as the forecasted one (as in Figure 1a). In an 
analogous way, under the “Ecological” perspective, a province is classified as high resilient in 
two cases: i) its actual growth is significantly higher than the forecasted one (as in Figure 1e); 
or ii) its actual growth is statistically the same as the forecasted one but the employment level 
is higher than the predicted one in absent of the crisis (as in Figure 1d). In any other case, the 
respective province will be classified as low resilient. Results indicate that all Spanish 
provinces can be considered as low resilient. 
“Adaptative” versus “Engineering”/“Ecological” resilience results are different. 
However, since they rely on different hypothesis, the key issue is to determine whether or not 
they are connected. To answer this question, first, let’s define a dummy variable which takes 
the value 1 for those provinces that present a better behaviour than the national average, and 
zero otherwise, according to the “Engineering”/“Ecological” perspective. The dummy 
variable so created will be the endogenous term of a probit model whose explicative variables 
describe “Adaptative” resilience in the province. Results are clear: higher resilient provinces 
(according the “Adaptative” perspective) are more likely to have also a better behaviour than 
the rest (according to the two other perspectives). Furthermore, results reveal that an adequate 
specialization strategy in the past does not have a significant effect in this equation.  
Finally, to gain further insight into the specialization role, we analyse the relationship 
between specialization and “Engineering”/“Ecological” resilience through the assessment of 
the effect on resilience of the sectoral specialization of the region. In fact, our purpose is in 
                                                          
3 They are represented as dotted lines in graphs in Figure 1. 
5 
 
line with the work of Cuadrado-Roura and Maroto (2016) who also relate resilience to 
regional productive specialization and productivity.  
In our case, provincial specialization is measured by the location quotients, obtained 
for each quarter of the sample. Next, we average location quotients for each of the two 
periods (pre- and post- crisis) and for the four main economic sectors: agriculture, 
construction, industry and services. Results are clear: the specialization in the pre-crisis period 
in the construction sector reduces the probability of presenting a good performance in term of 
the “Engineering”/“Ecological” resilience; the opposite takes place for provinces specialised 
in the service sector. Specialization in agriculture and industry sector are positive but not 
significant.  
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 shows the methodology for 
accomplish the measure for the three resilience notions. Section 3 is devoted to employment 
data used in the analysis. Section 4 shows the results obtained for the three approaches to 
resilience as well as its relations. Finally, the paper finishes with a Section of conclusions. 
 
2. Methodology 
 As explained before, the first step in our proposal is to identify the time in which the 
shock occurs for the Spanish case. This will allow us to define the pre-crisis (till the shock 
happens) and the post-crisis period (from the shock onwards). Next, we will proceed to 
measure the three resilience notions as explained below. 
 
2.1. “Adaptative” resilience: shift-share analyses 
 “Adaptative” resilience refers to the capacity of an economy to reconfigure, that is, to 
adapt its structure so as to maintain and acceptable growth path. We approach this issue by 
means of two shift-share analyses. The goal of the first is to identify the main factors affecting 
for employment growth in the pre-crisis period, while the second will analyse the path of 
growth in the post-crisis period. 
As it is well-known, shift-share analysis is a technique to identify the factors 
underpinning geographical variations in employment growth. Basically, it consists on 
examining the interdependencies of a subarea with the parent area, trying to identify the 
principal components of growth. First, we will decompose the temporal change in a 
6 
 
province’s employment over a given period into three additive components: National Share 
(NS), Industry Mix (IM) and Regional Share (RS). Formally, denoting by ( )riL t  the level of 
employment in sector i (i=1,…S) in province r (r=1,…,R) in period t (t=1,…,T), a temporal 
change in employment in sector i and province r between t and t+m can be decomposed as: 
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )r r r r r ri i i i i iL t m L t m L t NS t m IM t m RS t m∆ + = + − = + + + + +  
Where each of these three components can be expressed as follows:  
 
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
r r
i i
r r
i i i
r r r
i i i i
NS t m r L t
IM t m r r L t
RS t m r r L t
•
•
• •
•
•
+ =
 + = − 
 + = − 
 (1) 
being  
r•• = the national (percentage) growth of employment between t and t+m. 
ir
• =  the national (percentage) growth by sector i of employment during this period. 
r
ir =  the provincial (percentage) growth by sector i of employment during this period. 
The National Share of sector i represents the change in employment due to the national 
growth effect; is measured assuming that all sectors in a province are growing at the same 
national rate. The Industry Mix for sector i represents the employment growth induced by the 
specific economic structure. It is measured evaluating the provincial employment growth due 
to the differences between the sectoral national growth rates and the average national rate. 
Finally, the Regional Share of sector i is the difference between the actual change and the sum 
of national and industry shares. It captures provincial-specific factors such as positive (or 
negative) externalities arising from agglomeration effects, local labor force characteristics, 
local incentives, locational advantages, environment, etc. 
By summing over all sectors in a province, we arrive at the aggregated national, 
industrial mix and regional share components for province r, as follows: 
 
1
1
1
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
S
r r
i
i
S
r r
i i
i
S
r r r
i i i
i
NS t m r L t
IM t m r r L t
RS t m r r L t
•
•
=
• •
•
=
•
=
+ =
 + = − 
 + = − 
∑
∑
∑
  (2) 
7 
 
The overall national component, ( )rNS t m+ , measures the national trend common to all 
Spanish provinces. The overall industrial mix, ( )rIM t m+ , measures employment growth 
generated by the economic structure of province r. If a province r presents a positive 
industrial mix means that it is specialized in dynamic sectors ( ir r
• •
•> ) and consequently, it is 
likely to present a positive growth for the aggregated employment. Finally, the regional share 
reflects the extent to which the growth rate of the whole set of sectors improves, or not, the 
national counterpart. Hence a positive regional share reflects positive provincial externalities 
that contribute to impulse sectoral employment growth above the national sectoral average. 
  The combination of industrial mix and regional shares allows us classifying each 
province in one of the four categories displayed in Table 1. Provinces in Category I combine 
advantages in sectoral structure (due to its specialization in dynamic sectors) with locational 
advantages (positive externalities associated to localization). Provinces in Category II have 
advantages due to its sectoral structure, since they are specialized in dynamic sectors, but their 
performance in the province is not adequate. Provinces in Category III have advantages due to 
its geographical location but not to its sectoral structure. Finally, provinces in Category IV 
face problems since neither their sectoral structure nor their locational characteristics 
contributes to employment growth. 
(Insert Table 1) 
Finally, to complete these results, we pay attention to Esteban (1972) who suggests a 
further decomposition of the regional share component that links localization advantages and 
specialization. He introduces the concept of homothetic employment, defined as the expected 
employment level in sector i and province r if such province would have had the national 
employment structure, in our notation: 





=
•
•
•
•
L
LLL irri~ . The concept of homothetic employment 
is related to specialization, measured by the location quotient (LQi,r), as: 
 
r
i
rr
i,ri
i
L
Lrif LQ 1LLi L
L
•
•
•
•
⇒ = <<   (3) 
Next, the Regional Share in (2) is decomposed into two additional terms, the so-called Net 
Regional Share (NRS) and a Distributional Effect (DE), as follows: 
8 
 
  
1 1 1
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
S S Sr rr r r r r r
i ii i i i i i i i
i i i
NRS DE
RS t m r r L t r r L t r r L t L t• • •
= = =
      + = − = − + − −        ∑ ∑ ∑
(((( ((((((((
 (4) 
For our purpose, we pay attention to the sign of the distributional effect, meaning that: 
• A positive distributional effect corresponds to 



>
> •
LL
rr
r
i
r
i
i
r
i
~  or 


<
< •
LL
rr
r
i
r
i
i
r
i
~ . In the first case 
the province r is specialized in sectors for which the province has location advantages, 
while in the second case province r is not specialized in sectors for which the province 
has not location advantages. In both cases, the specialization pattern is correct.  
• A negative distributional effect occurs when 



<
> •
LL
rr
r
i
r
i
i
r
i
~  or 


>
< •
LL
rr
r
i
r
i
i
r
i
~ . In the first case, 
province r has location advantages for sectors in which the province is not specialized. 
In the second case, there are not location advantages for sectors in which the province 
is specialized. In both cases, we detect problems in the specialization pattern. 
 
2.2  “Engineering”/“Ecological” resilience 
 We need a process in various stages in order to proxy the notion of 
“Engineering”/“Ecological”. First, it is necessary to estimate a model for the pre-crisis period. 
Second, estimation results are used to forecast the annual growth rate of total employment and 
the total employment level in the post crisis period, by provinces. The forecasts are treated as 
the counterfactual (or predicted) values in absence of the crisis. Finally, the comparison of 
forecasts and actual values will enable us to conclude on the resilient nature of Spanish 
provinces. 
In order to estimate and forecast the provincial total employment growth, we adopt a 
spatial panel data approach since, as it is well-known, they allow for unobservable cross-
sectional and time effects, as well as to account for the spatial dependence between cross-
sectional units at any point in time. Spatial dependence implies that, due to spillover effects 
(e.g., commuters or trade flows), neighbouring regions may have similar economic 
performance. Hence, we expect to improve traditional panel data models by paying attention 
to geographical factors in the sample.  
Prediction with spatial panel data models may be highly accurate, as shown by Baltagi 
and Li (2004, 2006) in the case of per-capita cigarette and liquor consumption in the United 
9 
 
States. Similarly, Longhi and Nijkamp (2007) obtained good predictions for the regional 
labour market in West German regions whereas Kholodilin et al. (2008) focused on GDP of 
German Länders. A comparison of different spatial panel data models is carried out by 
Baltagi et al. (2012). Furthermore, on the line of the present paper, Angulo and Trívez (2010) 
conclude that a dynamic spatial lag panel data model outperforms fifty non spatial seasonal 
ARIMA models, from a purely forecasting point of view. 
We focus on the annual growth rate of total employment in all provinces (r=1,…,R) 
(seasonally differenced) which, from now on, will be denoted by the vector 1[ ,..., ] 't t Rty y y= , 
where 
1
( ) ( 4)100 with
( 4)
r r s
r r
rt ir
i
L t L ty L L
L t =
− −
= =
− ∑
 


. Next, we compare three panel models 
which exploit the temporal and spatial dimensions of the data. All of them introduce 
provincial-specific intercepts, rµ  (r=1,2…,R), in order to account for the heterogeneity 
among spatial units.  
The first model under consideration is the dynamic Fixed Effect (FE) panel data 
model, which is defined as follows: 
 1 2 t 3 t 4 trt rt
2
rt
rrt 1yDq2 Dq3 Dq4y
~N 0, η
µ ηβ β β β t
η σ
− + += + + + + 

    
 (5) 
where Dqj, with j=2,3 and 4, is a seasonal dummy which has a value of 1 when evaluating 
growth for quarter j and 0 otherwise. 
Model (5) considers the temporal dimension of data through the introduction of a lag 
of the dependent variable; this term takes into account the serial dependence between 
observations on each cross-sectional unit over time and it captures the inertia in the series. As 
largely analyzed in literature (see Hsiao, 2003; Sevestre and Trognon, 1996; Baltagi, 2005), 
Ordinary Least Square estimator applied to the demeaned equation4 is biased and inconsistent 
for T finite, regardless the number of cross-section in the sample (R in our case). In fact, 
demeaning creates a correlation of order (1/T) between the demeaned term and the demeaned 
error term, known as the Nickel bias (Nickell, 1981). If T is fixed, alternative estimation 
methods have been suggested such as Anderson and Hsiao (1981), Arellano and Bond (1991), 
                                                          
4 The demeaning equation is obtained by taking each variable in the regression equation in deviation 
from its average over time, for instance for the endogenous variable: 
T
rt
* t 1
rt rt
y
y y
T
=
∑
= − . 
10 
 
Arellano and Bover (1995) or Blundell and Bond (1998). All of them propose to first 
difference the data to eliminate the cross-sectional fixed effects and then apply Generalized 
Method-of-Moments (GMM), using a set of appropriate instruments. Other proposals refer to 
the construction of bias corrected estimators for the dynamic panel data model, by analytically 
modifying the within estimator (Kiviet, 1995; Hahn and Kuersteiner, 2002; Bun and Carree, 
2005). Finally, Hsiao et al. (2002) propose the use of Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimation 
based on the unconditional likelihood function of the model, concluding that ML estimator is 
asymptotically more efficient than the GMM. In this paper, Arellano and Bond (1991) 
procedure will be applied. 
Second, we are going to use a model that pays attention to the spatial dimension of the 
data, by considering the cross-sectional dependence among the observations at each point in 
time; this is the spatial autoregressive (SAR) model of Cliff and Ord (1973). The static SAR 
specification includes the spatially lagged dependent variable as an additional regressor: 
 
R
rj 1 2 t 3 t 4 trt jt rt
j 1
2
rt
rw Dq2 Dq3 Dq4y y
~N 0, η
µ ηr β β β β
η σ
=
+ += + + + +∑ 

   
 (6) 
where rjw  is the (r,j) element of the spatial weight matrix W. As is well known, this matrix is 
pre-specified, nonnegative, of order RxR and describes the arrangement of the cross-sectional 
units in the sample (Anselin, 1988, 2007). In the following, we refer this model as the Fixed 
Effect SAR model (FE-SAR). 
 Finally, to account simultaneously for the temporal and spatial dimensions of the data, 
we consider the so-called dynamic Fixed Effect SAR model, which read as follows: 
 
R
rj 1 2 t 3 t 4 trt jt rt
j 1
2
rt
rrt 1yw Dq2 Dq3 Dq4y y
~N 0, η
µ ηtr β β β β
η σ
=
−
+ += + + + + +∑ 

   
 (7) 
The estimation of model (7) is a bit more difficult than the previous two, given the 
strong endogeneity of the regressors. However, Yu et al. (2008) developed a bias corrected 
maximum likelihood algorithm with good properties. 
 Once models (5) to (7) have been estimated, we proceed to select the best specification 
using standard specification tests. As indicated before, the model chosen will be used to 
forecast the annual employment growth for the post-crisis period, which represents a proxy of 
11 
 
annual total employment growth in Spanish provinces in absence of the economic crisis. 
Finally, we measure the effect of the crisis by comparing forecasted and actual values. 
 
3. Data 
The difference in resilience among Spanish regions is reinforced by the political 
decentralization process taken place in Spain. In 1978 Spain embarked on a rapid transition 
process from a highly centralized system in nearly every facet of public life (economy, 
politics, culture etc.) to a quasi-federal structure with 17 Autonomous Communities (NUTS2 
units) or 52 provinces (NUTS3). The completion of the so-called ‘Autonomic State’ was 
achieved formally in 1983. Since then, the weight of the regions has increased systematically 
at the expense of the central State. The decentralisation process included ‘own-source’ 
revenues for sub-central governments and tax sharing agreements among the regions and the 
central government. Currently, regional governments are responsible for 40%, approximately, 
of total public expenditure and for more than 50% of government employment. This 
autonomy facilitates the appearance of different policies among regions, which generate 
important regional disparities in terms of sectoral specialization, employment, productivity, 
etc.  
We use data on total employment for each of the fifty5 Spanish provinces, obtained on 
a quarterly basis for the period 2002:1 to 2015:4. The series are taken from the Encuesta de 
Población Activa (EPA), published by the Instituto Nacional de Estadística (INE). As said 
before, we will pay attention to employment distributions among the four main sectors 
(agriculture, industry, construction and services) since resilience to the crisis may differ due 
to the different sectoral employment structure. 
Figure 2 presents the evolution and sectoral disaggregation of Spanish employment 
along the analysed period. Figure 2a shows a strong decrease in employment starting in 
2008:26 due to the global economic crisis; however, its impact is not equal for the four 
sectors. Figure 2b shows that the economic crisis has provoked a strong decrease in the 
                                                          
5 We have excluded the Spanish autonomous cities of Ceuta and Melilla. 
6 Such a breakpoint has also been confirmed through the calculation of successive F-Chow tests 
applied to the proposed models for all possible time periods.    
12 
 
weight of construction in favour of the service sector, while agriculture and industrial shares 
are less affected. 
(Insert Figure 2) 
To asset provinces specialization pattern, the location quotient for province r in sector 
i in period t, has been calculated as appears in expression (3). These coefficients allows us to 
declare a province r as specialized in sector i for that period t if the corresponding LQi,r (t) is 
higher than 1. 
 For the purpose of our study, we are interested in comparing the provincial 
specialization patterns in two different periods (pre- and post- crisis) and for the four sectors. 
A general overview of provincial specialization patterns appears in Figure 3, which depicts 
the relative frequency of specialization by provinces and periods; darker colours mean that the 
corresponding provinces appears as specialized in the respective sector at least half of the 
quarters. 
(Insert Figure 3) 
The specialization patterns in the pre- and post- crisis periods are quite similar for all 
the sectors except construction7. Furthermore, the maps show that, in general, the Northern 
provinces are specialized in industry; the Southern and Western provinces are specialized in 
agriculture; and finally, the coastal (such as Canary Islands, Málaga, Cádiz, Granada and 
Valencia) and central regions (such as Madrid, Salamanca or Zaragoza) tend to be 
specialized in the service sector. 
 
4. Results 
4.1 Adaptative resilience 
 As explained before, we have solved two shift-share decompositions in order to analyze 
employment growth before and after the shock. Hence, since the Spanish crisis has been 
already determined in the period 2008:2, we decompose the employment growth between 
industrial mix and regional share for the fifty Spanish provinces between 2002:1 and 2008:2, 
                                                          
7 In fact, the correlation coefficient among periods for each sector is the following: i) agriculture: 
0.9644; ii) industry: 0.8984; iii) construction: 0.4307; and iv) services: 0.9561. 
13 
 
on one hand, and between 2008:2 and 2015:4, on the other. Results are shown in Figure 4, 
and they are also mapped in Appendix (Figure A1).  
(Insert Figures 4 and A1) 
For our purposes, in relation to this notion of resilience, the most interesting part of the 
two figures refers to the similarities and dissimilarities between them. We summarize the 
changes according the following classification: (i) provinces that remain stable in categories I, 
II or III among both periods; (ii) provinces that improve in both components, Industrial Mix 
(IM) and Regional Share (RS); (iii) provinces that improve in only one component, IM or RS; 
and finally (iv) the remaining cases will be classified as low-resilient provinces. The results 
obtained are shown in Figure 5. 
(Insert Figure 5) 
In this Figure we identify a group of high resilient provinces among which Málaga 
and Granada appear in the shift-share Category I in both sub periods. There is also a cluster 
of provinces of group (i) following the Aragonese axe in the Ebro valley, in the North-East of 
the peninsula, composed by Araba, Zaragoza, Huesca, Teruel, Cuenca and Lleida. The 
provinces of group (ii), which have improved both shift-share components are concentrated in 
the North, including cases in the Autonomous Community of Galicia (A Coruña, Lugo) and 
Basque Country (Gipuzkoa), also Palencia. Provinces in group (iii) have improved at least 
one the components, and they are very dispersed over the peninsula with cases in the North 
(Asturias, Leon, Navarra), in the center (such as Salamanca, Badajoz or Madrid) and in the 
South (Canary Islands or Almería). The remaining provinces should be classified as low-
resilient, since they have worsened their situation after the crisis. Among them, we can find 
Southern provinces such as Sevilla, Cádiz, Huelva or Cáceres together with most provinces 
along the Mediterranean axe such as Girona, Barcelona, Tarragona, Castellón, Valencia, 
Murcia and Baleares.  
Figures 6 shows the decomposition of the Regional Share into the Net Regional Share 
(NRS) and the distributional effect (DE) for the fifty Spanish provinces in pre-crisis (between 
2002:1 and 2008:2) and post-crisis (2008:2 to 2015:4) periods. In addition, the sign of the 
distributional effect for both sub-periods is mapped in the Figure A2 in the Appendix. 
(Insert Figures 6 and A2) 
As before, changes in the sign of the Distributional Effect (DE) between the two 
periods are represented in Figure 7, which allows us to distinguish three groups of provinces: 
14 
 
(a) provinces that have improved their DE sign (in the sense that the sign changes from 
negative to positive); (b) provinces that have not changed its sign between periods (stable DE 
sign) and finally, (c) provinces that have worsened their DE sign (from positive to negative). 
(Insert Figure 7) 
In general, we can conclude that Spanish provinces have maintained or improved their 
specialization profile in the post-crisis period. The worst situation corresponds to the Eastern 
and Northern provinces such as Girona, Tarragona, León, Ourense, Cantabria, Gipuzkoa and 
Navarra, who change the sign from positive to negative.  
 
4.2 “Engineering”/“Ecological” resilience 
Results for the estimation of the three proposed panel data models are gathered in 
Table 2. Regarding the W matrix, among different alternatives (always based on measures of 
geographical distance), we have chosen the four-nearest neighbor criteria because of its 
simplicity, its balance between null and non-null elements and its adequacy in terms of 
estimated models8. As can be seen in the Table, the inertia in employment growth and the 
neighborhood effect are highly significant. Moreover, significance tests and measures of 
goodness of fit indicate that the Dynamic Fixed Effect Spatial Autoregressive (Dynamic FE-
SAR) is the best model for our case. Furthermore, annual employment growth does not 
significantly differ among seasons. 
(Insert Table 2) 
To cope with our objective, and using this model, we forecast the annual employment 
growth for the period 2008:3-2015:4, which represents a proxy of annual total employment 
growth in Spanish provinces in absence of the economic crisis. The differences between the 
respective forecast and the actual growth are positive for all regions and periods representing, 
as said, the impact of the crisis on regional employment. Hence, as regards resilience, this 
means that any Spanish province has been resilient to the crisis.  
(Insert Figure 8) 
                                                          
8 Several studies have analyzed the consequences of sparser/denser matrix (see for instance Smith, 
1999). Moreover, our results are consistent with other W matrices specified on the basis of the inverse 
of the distance between centroids in the provinces or the inverse of the square of such distances. 
Matrices based on the contiguity criteria have been discarded since we assume that (following Zeilstra 
and Elhorst, 2014), interaction in employment markets is determined, mainly, by distance. 
 
15 
 
From now on, we will refer to these positive differences as “growth drop”. A summary 
of them appears in Figure 8. Figure 8a depicts a map of the provincial average “growth 
drops” after the crisis, which shows that the “growth drops” are not homogeneously 
distributed among all the Spanish provinces. In fact, a Wald test of homogeneity among the 
fifty provinces takes a value of 146.18, which is higher than the critical value of a 2 (49)χ at 
the 5% level of significance. Differences among the provinces can be measured by comparing 
each provincial average “growth drop” with the national average (equal to 5.259%). Results 
appears in Figure 8b and show that the provinces with performance better than the average are 
A Coruña, Lugo, Araba, Bizkaia, Salamanca, Palencia, Segovia, Soria and Canary Islands. 
 
4.3 “Adaptative” versus “Engeniering”/“Ecological” resilience uses 
As explained before, one of the purposes of this study is connected to the relation 
between “Adaptative” and the other two notions of resilience. We envisage three procedures 
to carry out this analysis. 
First, the estimated “growth drop” for each province will be regressed on the 
information on provincial specialization. Before doing the regression, we define six dummy 
variables Dbccj and Dpccj, (j=1,2 and 3), with a value of 1 for all provinces that are classified 
as category j according to Industry Mix and Regional Shift share for the pre-crisis period 
(2002:1-2008:2) and post-crisis period (2008:2-2015:4), respectively (note that the reference 
category is the fourth). Similarly, Dbcpde and Dpcpde are binary variables taking a value of 1 
if a province presents a positive distributional effect (right specialization), and 0 otherwise, in 
the pre- or post-crisis period. A trend variable is also included in the equation to account for a 
global national trend along the post-crisis period. Three models, A, B and C, are estimated 
with different combination of previous dummy variables: only post-crisis variables (Model 
A), only before-crisis variables (Model B) and, finally, both types of variables (Model C). 
Estimation results appear in Table 3. 
(Insert Table 3) 
As shown in this Table, provincial “growth drops” have significantly decreased across 
time. Regarding sectoral composition effect, results indicate that provinces with advantages in 
sectoral structure and localization (Category I) or those with advantage in location (Category 
III) in the post-crisis period exhibit a significantly lower “growth drop”. The opposite takes 
place in reference to the pre-crisis period: regions classified as strong, looking at their sectoral 
16 
 
composition, suffered the largest “growth drop”. These results can be interpreted in the sense 
that the crisis changed dramatically the leading sectors of the Spanish economy. Finally, 
Table 3 shows that the right/wrong specialization pattern does not have a significant effect in 
“growth drops”. 
The second block of results refers to the relationship between the “Adaptative” notion 
(related to the Industrial Mix, IM and/or Regional Share, RS, together with the improvement 
in specialization pattern) and the “drop growth” results (measured in terms of a dummy 
variable that takes the value of one for provinces with a lower “drop growth” than the national 
average). Results for the estimated probit model are shown in Table 4, together with some 
diagnostics which enable us to validate our estimations. 
(Insert Table 4) 
As expected, results in Table 4 show that provinces that improve the two components, 
IM and RS (according to the “Adaptative” perspective) are more likely to present a behavior 
better than the national average. In fact, for this group, the probability of presenting a better 
behavior is 0.536 higher than for the others. Furthermore, provinces that only improve one of 
the two components also present a significantly higher probability of behaving better than the 
others but, in this case, the marginal effect is lower (0.236). Finally, changes in the 
specialization pattern does not have a significant influence on probability. 
The third procedure considers the relation between “growth drops” and sector 
specialization. To cope with this objective, we estimate a probit model to measure the 
influence of sector specialization in the pre- and post- crisis periods on the probability of 
presenting better behavior than the national average (or a significant lower “growth drop”). 
Results appear in Table 5. 
(Insert Table 5) 
In first place, according to the significance tests in the Table, we can conclude that 
“growth drops” are significantly related to pre-crisis provincial specialization. The probability 
of having better performance than the national average increases for those provinces 
specialized in the service sector in the pre-crisis period. As expected, the worse behavior is for 
provinces specialized in the construction sector also in the pre-crisis period. Although not 
significant, specialization in agriculture and industry is also positively related to the 
probability of presenting better behavior than the average. These results are in line with 
Cuadrado-Roura and Maroto (2016), who also concluded that the most resilient regions are 
17 
 
those previously specialized in some advanced market services together with dynamic and 
productive industries.  
 
5. Conclusions 
There is wide consensus in the applied literature on the negative effects of the recent 
global downturn. However, its impact differs substantially between countries, and even 
between different regions in the same country; the same can be said in relation to the way the 
territories overcame the crisis. Consequently, many economists have focused on identifying 
the factors that minimise the impact of the crisis. This line of research is closely related with 
the concept of resilience of a territory. Our objective is to evaluate the resilience of Spanish 
provinces to the recent global downturn. 
According to the literature, a region can be classified as resilient, in terms of the so-
called “Adaptative” resilience, if it has the capacity to reconfigure, that is, to adapt its 
structure (firms, industries, technologies and institutions) so as to maintain an acceptable 
growth path in employment, output or wealth over time. In this paper, we have approached 
this issue through a traditional shift-share analysis applied both, to the pre-and post-crisis 
periods. Under this approach, a region is resilient if, after the economic crisis, it has 
maintained, or even improved, its situation according to sectoral structure and locational 
advantages. Results show that the most resilient Spanish provinces are Málaga, A Coruña, 
Lugo, Gipuzkoa, Palencia, as well as some others in the Western part of Spain, in the North 
or in the centre like, Madrid. 
Other resilience notions, named as “Engineering” and “Ecological” resilience, refer to 
differences in growth and level of total employment between both periods. According to an 
“Engineering” approach, a province is high resilient if its actual employment growth (and 
level of employment) is statistically the same as the forecasted one within a relatively short 
period of time. According to the “Ecological” notion, a province is high resilient if its post-
shock employment growth rate is higher or equal than the pre-shock growth rate within a 
relatively short period of time. Furthermore, in the case of equality, the employment level 
must also be higher than the predicted one in absent of the crisis. If some of the previous 
requirements are not accomplished, the region will be classified as low resilient. To evaluate 
this issue, in this paper we have used forecasts from a spatial panel data model to evaluate 
provincial resilience to the crisis. Results have shown that all Spanish provinces have been 
18 
 
low resilient to the crisis. However, the provinces that exhibited a better behavior than the 
national average are A Coruña, Lugo, Araba, Bizkaia, Salamanca, Palencia, Segovia, Soria 
and Canary Islands. 
Next, the paper has analysed the relationship between the different resilience notions, 
for the case of Spain. We have found that provinces with sectoral structure and locational 
advantages (appear in the shift-share Category I) or those with advantage in location 
(Category III) in the post-crisis period, have a significantly lower “growth drop” (according 
to the “Engineering” and “Ecological” resilience measures). The opposite takes place in 
reference to the pre-crisis period, since the largest “growth drop” has been suffered by regions 
that appeared to be in a stronger situation in the pre-crisis period. Moreover, those provinces 
improving the two shift-share components, IM and RS (according to the “Adaptative” 
perspective), are more likely to present a behavior better than the national average. Moreover, 
the probability of presenting a better behavior (lower “growth drop” than the national 
average) increases for those regions specialized in the service sector before the crisis. As 
expected, the worse behavior corresponds to those regions specialized in the construction 
sector. 
To conclude, let us remark from our results that sectoral and locational advantages are 
very important to mitigate the negative effects of a crisis. Furthermore, also in the Spanish 
specific case, those regions specialized in the service sector (also in industry, to a lesser 
extend) suffered the crisis in a smoother way. Consequently, in a decentralized economy, such 
as the current Spanish case, it is important to develop a strong and persistent policy 
supporting the most dynamic sectors of the economy. Only in this case, provinces will suffer 
a global economic crisis, like that that hit the World economy in 2008, in a smoothest way. Of 
course, this will not prevent from the crisis, but surely will reduce its impact on the territory. 
Finally, let us conclude that although we have found certain relationship between the 
different resilience notions, the conclusions depend to a great extent on the techniques for 
measuring them. The selection of the most adequate technique is a matter of choice, but some 
cautiousness must be taken when comparing different approaches. 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
References 
Anderson TW, Hsiao C (1981) Estimation of dynamic models with error components. Journal of the 
American Statistical Association 76: 598–606 
Angulo A, Trívez FJ (2010) The impact of spatial elements on the forecasting of Spanish labour series. 
Journal of Geographical Systems 12: 155–174 
Anselin L (1988) Spatial econometrics: methods and models. Kluwer, Dordrecht 
Anselin L (2007) Spatial Econometrics. In: Mills TC, Patterson K (eds) Handbook of 
econometrics, Vol. 1. Palgrave, Basingstoke, pp 901-969 
Arellano M, Bond S (1991) Some tests of specification for panel data: monte carlo evidence and 
application to employment equations. Review of Economic Studies 58: 277–297  
Arellano M, Bover O (1995) Another look at the instrumental-variable estimation of error-components 
models. Journal of Econometrics 68, 29–51 
Augustine N, Wolman H, Wial H, McMillen M (2013) Regional Economic Capacity, Economic 
Shocks and Economic Resilience, MacArthur Foundation Network on Building Resilient 
Regions, Working Paper May. 
Baltagi BH (2005) Econometric Analysis of Panel Data (3rd Edition). Wiley, Chichester 
Baltagi BH, Li D (2004) Prediction in the panel data model with spatial correlation. In: Anselin L, 
Florax RJGM, Rey S (Eds) Advanced in spatial econometrics: methodology, tools and 
application. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg (Germany): 283–295 
Baltagi BH, Li D (2006) Prediction in the panel data model with spatial correlation: the case of liquor. 
Spatial Economic Analysis 1(2): 175–185 
Baltagi BH, Bresson G, Pirotte A (2012) Forecasting with spatial panel data. Computational 
Statistics and Data Analysis 56: 3381–3397 
Blundell R, Bond S (1998) Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel data models. 
Journal of Econometrics 87: 115–143 
Bun M, Carree M (2005) Bias-corrected estimation in dynamic panel data models. Journal of Business 
& Economic Statistics 3 (2): 200-210(11) 
Cliff AD, Ord JK (1973) Spatial Autocorrelation. Pion Ltd., London. 
Cuadrado-Roura JR, Maroto A (2016) Unbalanced regional resilience to the economic crisis in Spain: 
a tale of specialisation and productivity. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 
9(1): 153-178 
Doran J, Fingelton B (2013) US Metropolitan Area Resilience: Insights from Dynamic Spatial Panel 
Estimation, Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the Regional Science Association 
International (British and Irish Section),University of Cambridge, August 22 
Esteban J (1972) A reinterpretation of shift-share analysis. Regional and Urban Economics 2: 249–
261. 
Evans R, Karecha J (2013) Staying on Top: Why is Munich so Resilient and Successful? European 
Planning Studies, DOI:10.1080/09654313.2013.778958 
Fingleton B, Garretsen, H, Martin R (2012) Recessionary Shocks and Regional Employment, Journal 
of Regional Science 52 (1): 109–133 
Fingleton B, Palombi S (2013) Spatial panel data estimation, counterfactual predictions and local 
economic resilience among British towns in the Victorian era, Regional Science and Urban 
Economics 43: 649–660 
20 
 
Foster KA (2007) A case study approach to understanding regional resilience. Working Paper 2007–
08, Institute of Urban and Regional Development, Berkeley 
Hahn J, Kuersteiner G (2002) Asymptotically unbiased inference for a dynamic panel model with 
fixed effects when both n and T are Large. Econometrica 70(4): 1639–1657 
Hill E, Wial H, Wolman H (2008) Exploring regional economic resilience. Working paper 2008 (4). 
Institute Urban and Regional Development, UC Berkeley 
Holling CS (1973) Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics 4: 1–23 
Holling CS (1996) Engineering resilience versus ecological resilience. In P. Schulze (ed.).Engineering 
within Ecological Constraints, pp. 31–44. Washington, DC: National Academy Press 
Holling CS (2001) Understanding the complexity of economic, ecological and social systems. 
Ecosystems 4: 390–405 
Hsiao C (2003) Analysis of panel data (2nd Edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Hsiao C, Pesaran MH, Tahmiscioglu AK (2002) Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Fixed 
Effects Dynamic Panel Data Models Covering Short Time Periods. Journal of 
Econometrics 109: 107–150 
Instituto Nacional de Estadística, INE (several years). Encuesta de población activa. Madrid 
Kholodilin KA, Siliverstovs B, Kooths S (2008) A dynamic panel data approach to the 
forecasting of the GDP of German Länder. Spatial Economic Analysis 3(2): 195–207 
Kiviet J (1995) On bias, inconsistency, and efficiency of various estimators in dynamic panel data 
models. Journal of Econometrics 68: 81–126 
Longhi S, Nijkamp P (2007) Forecasting regional labor market developments under spatial 
heterogeneity and spatial correlation. International Regional Science Review 30: 100–119 
Martin R (2012) Regional economic resilience, hysteresis and recessionary shocks. Journal of 
Economic Geography 12: 1–32 
Martin RL, Sunley P (2015) On the notion of regional economic resilience: conceptualization and 
explanation. Journal of Economic Geography 15: 1–42 
McGlade J, Murray R, Baldwin J, Ridgway K, Winder B (2006) Industrial resilience and decline: a co-
evolutionary framework. In E. Garnsey, J. McGlade (eds) Complexity and Co-Evolution: 
Continuity and Change in Socio-economic Systems, pp. 147–176. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
Modica M, Reggiani A (2015) Spatial economic resilience: overview and perspectives. Networks and 
Spatial Economics 15: 211-233. 
Nickell SJ (1981) Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica 49:1417–1426 
Romer R (2001) Advanced Macroeconomics. New York: McGraw Hill 
Sevestre P, Trognon A (1996) Dynamic linear models. In: Mátyás L, Sevestre P The econometrics of 
panel data, 2nd revised edition. Kluwer, Dordrecht (The Netherlands) 
Smith T (2009) Estimation Bias in Spatial Models with Strongly Connected Weight Matrices. 
Geographical Analysis 41: 307-332. 
Walker B, Gunderson L, Kinzig A, Folke C, Carpenter S, Schultz L (2006) A handful of heuristics and 
some propositions for understanding resilience in socio-ecological systems. Ecology and Society, 
11. Available online at: http://www.ecologyand society.org/vol11/iss1/art13/ [Accessed 1 
December 2010] 
Zeilstra J, Elhorst P (2014) Integrated Analysis of Regional and National Unemployment Differentials 
in the European Union. Regional Studies 48: 1739-1755 
21 
 
Yu J, de Jong R, and Lee LF (2008) Quasi-maximum likelihood estimators for spatial dynamic panel 
data with fixed effects when both N and T are large. Journal of Econometrics 146:118-134 
22 
 
Table 1. Region classification according to overall Industrial and Regional Share 
Category Industrial Mix Regional Share 
I + + 
II + - 
III - + 
IV - - 
 
 
Table 2. Results obtained for the panel data model specifications (a), (b), (c) 
 Dynamic FE 
Static 
FE- SAR 
Dynamic 
FE- SAR 
Constant 1.316*** (0.046)   
t 
0.622*** 
(0.039)  
0.553*** 
(0.027) 
Dq2 -0.169*** (0.039) 
-0.198 
(0.253) 
-0.129 
(0.228) 
Dq3 0.297*** (0.041) 
0.301 
(0.266) 
0.232 
(0.238) 
Dq4 0.066** (0.066) 
0.187 
(0.266) 
0.066 
(0.238) 
r  0.266*** (0.038) 
0.212*** 
(0.036) 
R2 0.374 0.138 0.398 
Log Ver.  -2814.25 -2522.68 
Number of 
observations 1000 1100 1050 
Tests for serial autocorrelation (b) 
H0: No 
autocorrelation of 
order 1 
 
-4.218*** 0.542 0.005 
H0: No 
autocorrelation of 
order 2 
0.318 0.280 0.064 
Sargan test of overidentifying restrictions 
H0: overidentifying 
restrictions are valid 47.23   
(a) Robust standard deviation in parenthesis. 
(b) * means significant al 10%; ** means significant al 5%; *** means significant al 1%.  
(c) Arellano-Bond tests in the case of dynamic FE model and Breusch-Godfrey test in the cases of FE-SAR 
models. 
 
23 
 
Table 3. Relationship between “growth drop” and shift-share analyses(a), (b) 
 Model A Model B Model C 
Constant 47.96 *** 
(2.56) 
46.23 *** 
(2.577) 
47.09 *** 
(2.57) 
Trend -0.201 *** 
(0.012) 
-0.201 *** 
(0.012) 
-0.201 *** 
(0.012) 
Dbcc1  1.406 *** 
(0.381) 
1.383 *** 
(0.381) 
Dbcc2  -0.577 * 
(0.326) 
-0.111 
(0.356) 
Dbcc3  1.511 *** 
(0.258) 
1.086 *** 
(0.294) 
Dbcpde  0.429** 
(0.2184) 
0.156 
(0.227) 
Dpcc1 -2.394 *** 
(0.285) 
 -1.691 *** 
(0.379) 
Dpcc2 -0.483  
(0.321) 
 -0.385 
(0.362) 
Dpcc3 -0.794 *** 
(0.266) 
 -0.824 *** 
(0.276) 
Dpcpde 0.022 
(0.215) 
 -0.091 
(0.224) 
(a) Robust standard deviation in parenthesis. 
(b) * means significant al 10%; ** means significant al 5%; *** means significant al 1%.  
 
 
24 
 
Table 4. “Ecological” versus “Adaptative” resilience. Relationship between changes 
(between pre- and post- crisis period) in regional classification and Distributional Effect 
(DE) sign and the fact of presenting better behavior than the national average (a), (b) 
 ESTIMATED 
PARAMETERS 
 
MARGINAL EFFECT 
(at mean) 
From changes between regional classification among pre- and post- crisis period (c) 
Stable in Cat. I, II or III 0.583 
(0.674) 
0.122 
(0.140) 
Improving in both, IM and RS 2.569*** 
(0.717) 
0.536*** 
(0.182) 
Improving in one, IM or RS 1.131* 
(0.586) 
0.236* 
(0.123) 
From changes in DE sign among pre- and post- crisis period(d) 
Stable in sign 0.468 
(0.819) 
0.098 
(0.164) 
Improving in DE sign 0.904 
(0.869) 
0.189 
(0.176) 
Constant -2.278*** 
(0.792) 
 
SPECIFICATION TESTS 
H0: Right specification   
      LM test 0.37  
      Hosmer-Lemeshow (4) 1.45  
      Hosmer-Lemeshow (10) 3.04  
H0: No differences among different 
regional categories 
13.95***  
H0: No differences among difference 
distributional sign 
1.30  
(a) Robust standard deviation in parenthesis. 
(b) * means significant al 10%; ** means significant al 5%; *** means significant al 1%.  
(c) The reference category is the non-resilience region group. 
(d) The reference category is the region group that are worsening in DE sign (from positive in 2002:1-
2008:2 to negative in 2008:2-2015:4). 
 
25 
 
Table 5. “Ecological” versus “Adaptative” resilience. Relationship between regional 
specialization (before and post crisis) and the fact of presenting better behavior than the 
national average(a), (b) 
 For those regions 
specialized before crisis in 
For those regions 
specialized after crisis in 
 Parameters  
Marginal 
Effects 
Parameters 
 
Marginal 
Effects 
Agriculture 0.678 
(1.880) 
0.141 
(0.398) 
-0.318 
(1.806) 
-0.066 
(0.378) 
Industry 0.534 
(1.154) 
0.111 
(0.237) 
-1.434 
(1.031) 
-0.298 
(0.212) 
Construction -1.506** 
(0.761) 
-0.314** 
(0.161) 
1.088 
(0.879) 
0.226 
(0.178) 
Services 3.037** 
(1.247) 
0.631** 
(0.288) 
-2.289 
(1.456) 
-0.476 
(0.315) 
Hypothesis tests:     
H0: Right specification     
      LM test 0.21    
      Hosmer-Lemeshow (4) 1.30    
      Hosmer-Lemeshow (10) 7.49    
H0: No differences among 
specializations before crisis 
13.84***    
H0: No differences among 
specializations after crisis 
  4.74  
(a) Robust standard deviation in parenthesis. 
(b) * means significant al 10%; ** means significant al 5%; *** means significant al 1%.  
26 
 
Figure 1. “Engineering” versus “Ecological” resilience 
“Engineering” Resilience or regional economic “rebound” 
Figure 1a 
 
Low “Ecological” resilience or negative regional economic “hysteresis” 
Figure 1b Figure 1c 
  
High “Ecological” resilience or positive regional economic “hysteresis” 
Figure 1d Figure 1e 
  
Source: Martin R (2012).
27 
 
Figure 2. Evolution of national employment 
 
Figure 2a. Total and sectoral Spanish workers (miles of workers) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2b: Sectoral share over total Spanish employment 
 
 
 
28 
 
Figure 3. Frequencies of specialization pattern by sectors and periods 
 
Pre-crisis period: 2002:1-2008:2  
 
Post-crisis period: 2008:3-2015:4 
 
 
Agriculture  
  
 
Industry 
  
 
Construction 
 
 
 
 
 
Services 
 
 
29 
 
Figure 4. Overall industrial mix and regional share and province classification for 
employment growth  
Pre-crisis period: 2002:1 and 2008:2 Post crisis period: 2008:2 and 2015:4 
  
 
Figure 5. Changes between category classification between pre- and post- crisis period in 
relation to province classification attending overall Industrial Mix (IM) and Regional 
Share (RS)  
 
30 
 
Figure 6. Net Regional Share (NRS) and Distributional Effect (DE) for employment 
growth. 
Pre-crisis period: 2002:1 and 2008:2 Post crisis period: 2008:2 and 2015:4 
  
 
Figure 7. Changes between Distributional Effect (DE) sign between pre- and post- crisis 
period. 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
Figure 8. Provincial versus national “growth drops” after the crisis. 
 
Figure 8a. Provincial average “Growth drops” after the crisis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8b: Provincial versus national average “Growth drops” after the crisis 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Figure 1A. Mapping results shown in Figure 4 (Overall industrial mix and regional 
share and province classification for employment growth) 
 
Pre-crisis period: 2002:1 and 2008:2 Post crisis period: 2008:2 and 2015:4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2A. Mapping of Distributional Effects (DE) show in Figure 6 
 
Pre-crisis period: 2002:1 and 2008:2 
 
Post crisis period: 2008:2 and 2015:4 
 
 
 
 
 
