How to Save Jobs and Build Back Better: Employee Ownership Transitions as a Key to an Equitable Economic Recovery

Maine Policy Review Volume 30 Issue 2 Impacts of COVID-19 Pandemic 2021 How to Save Jobs and Build Back Better: Employee Ownership Transitions as a Key to an Equitable Economic Recovery Rob Brown Cooperative Development Institute, rbrown@cdi.coop Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.library.umaine.edu/mpr Recommended Citation Brown, Rob. "How to Save Jobs and Build Back Better: Employee Ownership Transitions as a Key to an Equitable Economic Recovery." Maine Policy Review 30.2 (2021) : 111 -115, https://digitalcommons.library.umaine.edu/mpr/vol30/iss2/16. This Commentary is brought to you for free and open access by DigitalCommons@UMaine. How to Save Jobs and Build Back Better: Employee Ownership Transitions as a Key to an Equitable Economic Recoveryby Rob BrownA SILVER TSUNAMI’S PANDEMIC SURGEPrior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Maine was already on the leading edge of what was termed the “silver tsunami,” the looming retirement of aging business owners with no real plan for how to exit their businesses. While half of business owners nationally are over age 50, in rural regions such as Maine, nearly half are over 60. For businesses with more than 15 employees, 77 percent of owners are nearing retirement age (ICA Group 2020). According to national surveys, 79 percent of business owners want to retire within 10 years, 57 percent in less than 5 years, and 33 percent in less than three years (BEI 2016). Research by the University of Maine School of Business (2021) estimated that Maine has 12,790 small businesses, employing 108,000 workers, where the owner wants to retire in the next several years.Unfortunately, fewer than one in five business owners have a documented exit plan (BEI 2016), and most don’t under-stand the process or options. Assuming children will take over or they will find a buyer is risky, since successful transitions to the second generation have dropped from 30 percent to 19 percent in recent years (CCFB n.d.), and only 20 percent of commercial listings actually sell (Seiler Tucker 2020). Too often, the default option ends up being liquidation and closure, and the smaller and more rural the business, the greater the likelihood of that outcome. As a result, business closure due to owner retirement is the largest single source of avoidable job loss over time (Logue and McIntyre 2008). A study in New York State demonstrated the challenge. An estimated 3,700 busi-nesses close each year due to owner retire-ment, leading to a loss of 13,260 jobs annually (Sandmel 2019).  EFFECT OF THE  COVID-19 PANDEMICWhat, if anything, has changed as a result of the pandemic? In April 2021, research from the Federal Reserve (Crane et al. 2021) estimated that between March 2020 and February 2021 there were at least 200,000 and as many as 400,000 additional perma-nent business closures. While that is an increase of somewhere between one-third and one-half above what would’ve been expected in a normal year, it’s not nearly the level of closures predicted earlier in the pandemic. Mitigating the overall effect was the fact that the impact by sector was so uneven.  For example, permanent busi-ness closures in the personal services and restaurant and hospitality sectors were dramatically higher, but other sectors such as building materials and construc-tion had record years. For workers, this level of permanent business closures in the middle of a severe economic contraction has significant long-term negative effects on their employment prospects. As the Federal Reserve research states, this level of permanent job destruction detaches workers from the labor market at a time when there are few if any other options for them to reenter. Highlighting Census Bureau Business Dynamic Statistics data, permanent business closure accounts for 49 percent of annual gross job destruc-tion. Exacerbating the prolonged detach-ment from the workforce for these workers is the fact that skills developed from employment in one hard-hit sector are often not transferable to employment in another, better performing sector.So, while the worst predictions did not come to pass, “It could’ve been worse” is cold comfort for business owners who lost their life’s work and the millions of workers who lost their jobs. For business owners who did stay afloat through the pandemic, challenges remain even as the economy fully reopens and heats up. According to October 2021 Census data,1 nearly 60 percent of Maine’s businesses are still facing moderate to severe negative impacts from the pandemic, and many are still behind on at least one bill (e.g., rent, loans, or suppliers). Making matters worse, the well-publicized challenges in recruiting workers means many are struggling to get back to prepandemic revenue levels.While it is too early for definitive data, all evidence points to an accelera-tion of business owners looking to get out. In my work throughout the Northeast providing introductory exit planning education for business owners and consulting on transitions to employee ownership, I have seen a tripling of MAINE POLICY REVIEW  •  Vol. 30, No. 2  •  2021 111EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP AND ECONOMIC RECOVERYC O M M E N T A R Yrequests for assistance and attendance at workshops. Lawyers, accountants, and others who communicate directly with businesses, have told me that they are seeing the same thing—older business owners, already thinking about how to retire before the pandemic, want to develop a plan now. A recent survey of rural Maine busi-nesses conducted by the Cooperative Development Institute, in partnership with many local and regional chambers and development groups, hints at this acceleration. According to CDI’s rural Maine data, 71 percent of business owners are over 50 and 48 percent are over 60. Among them, 68 percent want to retire in less than five years, and 27 percent want to exit in one year. Yet only 16 percent have a plan for how to do that. Among those who have a plan, 21 percent assume they will liquidate and close.Two recent developments also have the potential to accelerate exits. First, many lenders and valuators have adjusted business valuation assumptions to accom-modate pandemic-induced losses without requiring the typical three to five years of subsequent profits, so businesses can conceivably regain prepandemic valua-tions within a year. Second, surveys show both business owners and brokers expect a rise in capital gains and other taxes to be a top driver of business exits (whether sale or liquidation) over the next year.2WORKERS TO OWNERS: KEY TO EQUITABLE ECONOMIC RECOVERYGiven the ominous pre- and post-pandemic trends, the growing popularity of transitioning businesses to employee ownership makes sense. As an article in Entrepreneur Magazine stated, “If you don’t have a solid succession plan in place and plan to put your business on the market and hope for the best, you’re setting yourself up for disappointment. Employee ownership could offer you an escape route from this predicament…. You’ll be tapping into a pool of ready-made buyers that were right under your nose all along” (Shepard 2018).But what about the benefits for workers, companies, and communities? If anything, the pandemic’s impact on job security and stability and its acceleration of income and wealth inequality has strengthened the argument for promoting and supporting employee ownership transitions. Helping business owners sell to employees could be a key to an equi-table economic recovery.When workers have a real ownership stake in the company where they work, both the workers and the company realize improved outcomes on many qualitative and quantitative measures. Compared to similar conventionally owned firms, employee-owned companies are more profitable and productive, create more jobs in the good times and lay off fewer workers in a downturn, and invest more in workforce training (Cribben 2020; Rosen and Quarrey 1987; Walsh et al. 2018). They have lower rates of bankruptcy, closure, and loan defaults (NCEO 2017).For workers, this means increased wages, benefits, and job stability and secu-rity. The beneficial impacts are even more pronounced for low-income, noncol-lege-educated, minority, women, and young workers. In one recent study (Boguslaw and Schur 2019), low-income, women and minority workers (particu-larly workers nearing retirement) in employee-owned firms had dramatically higher household wealth, and employee ownership significantly narrowed the gender and racial wealth gap. Another study (NCEO 2017) shows that employ-ee-owned firms were more successful at attracting and retaining young workers, a longstanding concern in Maine. Tracking 9,000 young workers from age 18 until age 35, the study showed that those working in employee-owned firms saw 33 percent higher wages, 92 percent higher household wealth, and 53 percent longer job tenure. These impacts held true regardless of race, gender, or geography. Formerly incarcerated workers in employee-owned companies saw lower rates of recidivism, 25 percent higher annual income, and 9 percent more hours worked than similar workers in non- employee-owned companies. Industries that create a disproportionate share of low-wage, insecure jobs and employ a disproportionate share of women and minorities see some of the greatest differ-entials in wages, benefits and job security for workers in employee-owned busi-nesses (Abell 2020).To imagine the impact of what could be achieved at scale, an article in the Harvard Business Review calculated that if 30 percent business ownership (a threshold at which businesses by most law and custom are considered employee- owned) were extended to all workers through employee-ownership models, household wealth would more than quadruple for the bottom 50 percent of workers, for all Black workers, and for all workers with only a high school degree (Dudley and Rouen 2021).For many businesses, employee ownership may be the most viable exit plan. The workers whose jobs are at stake are also the most motivated to “keep the lights on.” This strategy could save busi-nesses and jobs and offer workers an opportunity to improve incomes and build wealth through ownership, all while deepening local ownership and control of our businesses and making our economy more equitable and resilient. MAINE POLICY REVIEW  •  Vol. 30, No. 2  •  2021 112C O M M E N T A R YEMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP AND ECONOMIC RECOVERYThe potential wave of business liqui-dation and closure by aging owners poses a threat to our overall economy, and evidence suggests the pandemic has accel-erated that threat. At the same time, a chronically weak economy that results in low wages, few benefits, and limited job security for many workers has resulted in precarious livelihoods and exacerbated inequality, and the pandemic has acceler-ated that problem, too. Public policies that support expanding employee owner-ship would simultaneously and effectively address both threats.HOW TO RESPONDPresident Biden’s American Rescue Plan was passed into law this spring, and it is injecting nearly $1 billion in new state funding to aid Maine’s economic recovery, a once-in-a-lifetime invest-ment that could create lasting economic improvement and resiliency for Maine’s workers and economy. The benefits that would come from assisting a generation of aging business owners to transition ownership to their employees certainly fits the bill.Prior to the pandemic, the Mills administration developed an ambitious 10-year economic development strategy (Maine DECD 2019). That strategy is now guiding how the state deploys this federal investment, and priorities include helping businesses grow, be more produc-tive, create more and higher paying jobs, invest in skills training, and retain and attract more young workers. As the research shows, all of these priorities can be advanced by supporting employee ownership transitions.Economic and workforce develop-ment entities, particularly in more rural regions, have been trying to figure how best to respond to the growing concern posed by aging business owners and the demand for exit planning guidance. Relatively modest and targeted funding could dramatically and immediately expand the collaboration among and scale of these efforts, which include•  exit planning outreach, educa-tion, and technical assistance for business owners;•  assistance for interested owners and their employees in deter-mining business and financial feasibility for an employee owner-ship transition;•  assistance in designing and executing a transition for those businesses where it is feasible and desirable; and•  education and training for employee groups in business management, finances, and strategy so they can succeed. Maine already has a framework to coordinate some of this work. The federal Forest Products SectorInnovative models of cooperative ownership in the forest products sector have been developed in Scandinavian countries, Quebec, and elsewhere. Roughly 20 years ago, Finland invested $3.5 million to train business and workforce development entities to provide direct worker cooperative development services and technical assistance. In the subsequent years, Finland went from having few worker coop-eratives to having one of the fastest rates of yearly growth in worker cooperative development. Of particular interest to Maine, research shows that the prevalence and success of worker cooperatives was greatest in areas of economic distress and high unemployment (Kalmi 2013).In Quebec, nearly 50 forest products worker cooperatives sustain approximately 3,500 jobs and generate $250 million in revenues.4 Compared to the sector’s tradi-tionally owned businesses, they have invested more in new sawmills and upgrading existing sawmills, and have a higher survival rate (Tanner 2007). The success of such worker cooperatives is a result of a robust development ecosystem in the province that includes workforce and management training and business technical assistance. Some cooperatives were started from scratch, but many were formed by worker buyouts of existing businesses. One example, Boisaco, Inc., is owned by hundreds of millworkers, loggers, residents, and local business owners. Formed in 1984 to take over a sawmill, the cooperative has invested in its growth, diversified its product lines, and now employs over 600 people. In 2008, Boisaco posted a record year, even as an imploding housing market dragged down many companies in the sector. Inspired by Boisaco, hundreds of loggers and millworkers in Wisconsin have formed a cooperative and, with assistance from USDA and state government, are negotiating with Verso to take over a shuttered paper mill. As another example, Ward Lumber, Inc., a fourth-generation lumber and building materials business with 55 workers in New York’s North Country, recently completed a transition to a worker cooperative. Support in developing and financing this transition came from many partners, including the Small Business Development Center and a $250,000 grant from the state to subsidize the buyout and preserve the jobs.MAINE POLICY REVIEW  •  Vol. 30, No. 2  •  2021 113EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP AND ECONOMIC RECOVERYC O M M E N T A R YWorkforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, the primary source of funding for Maine’s entire workforce development system, explicitly identifies outreach, feasibility studies, and training to support employee buyouts as an allowable use of funds. This strategy is now being expanded in eastern Maine by the Northeast Workforce Development Board and its partners, and could quickly be taken to scale statewide.Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs) are natural partners in this effort, providing business and financial planning and training for employees in a transition. In fact, the recently enacted Main Street Employee Ownership Act mandates that SBDCs offer services and training that support worker cooperative and employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) transitions, and the national SBDC network is offering training opportunities to advisors so they can better assist these transitions.Many states are offering or consid-ering tax and other incentives for selling a business to the employees. Around 18 states, with varying levels of public funding, have established employee ownership centers to provide education, training, and technical assistance for busi-nesses considering employee ownership.3 In Maine, recent legislation to implement both strategies was passed unanimously by the legislature’s Taxation Committee, House of Representatives and Senate, after two years of careful deliberation, but the legislature then failed to fund it (Maine Legislature, 129th Session, LD 1520). Since the American Rescue Plan put $10 billion into the State Small Business Credit Initiative, and the US Treasury was directed by Congress to use some of the funding to support state employee ownership centers, those plans can be revived.Family Development Accounts are special savings accounts for low- to moder-ate-income people to save money for specific purposes, like starting or buying a business. Historically, FDA savings were matched, so there was a strong incentive to save. In the past, Maine offered a tax credit to encourage private citizens to contribute to FDA programs, so matching funds are available to support low-income workers’ savings, but this incentive was eliminated by the previous administration. Restoring funding for this incentive to contribute to FDA match programs would leverage substantial additional private funding. These funds would be particularly helpful to employees saving to build equity for a worker cooperative transition.TRANSITIONING TO AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR WORKERSEmployee ownership transitions address two critical challenges facing Maine. First, they reduce the threat of lost jobs as aging business owners either liquidate and close or sell the business for relocation out of the community or Maine’s Tourism Sector Even as it provides substantial tax revenue to the state, a solid foundation for many communities’ economies, and a livelihood for many entrepreneurs, tourism sector jobs are often low-wage, low-skill, and seasonal. However, by offering assistance to those businesses in transitioning to employee ownership, we can couple work in the tourism sector with an ownership opportunity that will improve the quality of that work through better wages and job stability.In 1992, for example, Maine’s first espresso bar/bookstore was founded in Rockland. Quickly welcomed by the community, it grew rapidly, adding a coffee-roasting busi-ness, moving to larger locations, and becoming Rock City Café and Coffee Roasters. By 2010, as Rockland was becoming a national model of downtown rejuvenation, the business had become a vibrant Main Street anchor institution. As the owner began thinking about retiring, she knew that selling it on the open market would likely result in the business being split up. Additionally, she was deeply committed to her employees, many of whom had worked for her since they were teenagers. To preserve her legacy, reward the employees who helped build it, and ensure an adequate retirement income for herself, she decided to transition the businesses to a worker-owned cooperative. With around 35, mostly young employees, the solidarity and resiliency they had built as a worker-owned cooperative has helped them weather the COVID-19 pandemic better than many other food service and tourist-oriented businesses.As another example, on Deer Isle, employees of three retail businesses—Burnt Cove Market, the Galley Market, and V&S Variety—heard that the owners were thinking of selling the stores and retiring. Potential buyers from outside the community might not have maintained the same levels of jobs and services, and employment oppor-tunities on the island are limited. So the employees, with assistance from a group of advisors, created the Island Employee Cooperative to buy the stores. It’s now one of the island’s largest year-round employers, the largest worker cooperative in Maine, and second largest in all of New England. MAINE POLICY REVIEW  •  Vol. 30, No. 2  •  2021 114C O M M E N T A R YEMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP AND ECONOMIC RECOVERYstate. Second, employee-owned compa-nies improve wages, benefits, job security, and stability for workers and improve company performance and resiliency.The policy options listed above are a sampling of ideas and resources that can be aligned to pursue an innovative strategy to preserve small businesses and jobs in the short term while building wealth for communities and individual workers over the long term. Supporting employee ownership transitions is also cost effective—from a public policy perspective, it is oftentimes much cheaper to save existing businesses and jobs than to replace them once they’re gone.Throughout Maine, there are grocery stores, cafés, coffee roasters, construction companies, energy companies, farm busi-nesses, manufacturers, insurance agen-cies, and many other types of businesses that are owned by their workers. They are a model for how an economy, even in the face of unprecedented threats, can be made to work for working people and their communities.REFERENCESAbell, Hillary. 2020. The Case for Employee Ownership. Project Equity. https:// project-equity.org/about-us/publications/.Boguslaw, Janet, and Lisa Schur. 2019. Building the Assets of Low and Moderate Income Workers and their Families: The Role of Employee Ownership. Institute for the Study of Employee Ownership and Profit Sharing, Rutgers University. BEI (Business Enterprise Institute). 2016.  2016 Business Owner Survey Report. https://www.exitplanning.com /2016-business-owner-survey-report.CCFB (Conway Center for Family Business). n.d. Family Business Facts. https://www .familybusinesscenter.com/resources /family-business-facts/.Crane, Leland D., Ryan A. Decker, Aaron Flaaen, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and Christopher Kurz. 2021. “Business Exit During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Non-Traditional Measures in Historical Context,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-089r1. Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Cribben, Lisa. 2020. “How to Develop Employee Owners in an ESOP.” Wipfli.com, November 8, 2020. https://www.wipfli.com/insights/articles/vflt-compa-nies-with-esop-owners-invest-more-in-training.Dudley, Thomas, and Ethan Rouen. 2021. “The Big Benefits of Employee Ownership.” Harvard Business Review, May 13, 2021. ICA Group. 2020. Employee Ownership: A Necessary Addition to the Coronavirus Economic Response. https://icagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Employee-Ownership-and-the-Coronavirus-Economic-Response.pdf.Kalmi, Panu. 2013. “Catching a Wave: the Formation of Co-operatives in Finnish Regions.” Small Business Economics 41(1): 295–313.Logue, John, and Bill McIntyre. 2008. Selling Your Business to Your Employees: Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs) and Employee-Owned Cooperative. Ohio Employee Ownership Center, Cooperative Development Center at Kent State University.Maine DECD (Department of Economic and Community Development). 2019. Maine Economic Development Strategy 2020–2029: A Focus on Talent and Innovation. Augusta: Maine DECD. https:// coronavirus.maine.gov/decd/strategic -plan.NCEO (National Center for Employee Ownership). 2017. Employee Ownership & Economic Well-Being: Household Wealth, Job Stability, and Employment Quality among Employee-Owners Age 28 to 34. Oakland, CA: NCEO. Rosen, Corey, and Michael Quarrey. 1987. “How Well Is Employee Ownership Working?” Harvard Business Review, September 1987. Sandmel, Mike. 2019. Fast Facts: Workplace Democracy for an Equitable New York. NYS Community Equity Agenda, New Economy Project. https://www .neweconomynyc.org/.Seiler Tucker, Michelle. 2020 “Why 8 out of 10 Businesses Don’t Sell.” Podcast.  https://seilertucker.com/why-8-out-of-10 -businesses-dont-sell/.Shepard, Laurie. 2018. “Why an Increasing Number of Retiring Entrepreneurs Are Selling the Business to Their Employees.” Entrepreneur, February 21, 2018. Tanner, Racheal A. 2007. “Worker Owned Cooperatives and the Ecosystems that Support Them.” Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge. https://dspace.mit.edu /handle/1721.1/81643.UMSB (University of Maine, School of Business). 2021. “Succession Planning and the Entrepreneurial Exit.” Presentation for the Maine Chamber of Commerce, April 8, 2021. Walsh, Peter, Michael Peck, and Ibon Zugasti. 2018. “Why the U.S. Needs More Worker-Owned Companies.” Harvard Business Review, August 8, 2018. Rob Brown is the director of Business Ownership Solutions at the Cooperative Development Institute (CDI), a nonprofit organization and the USDA-designated Cooperative Business Development Center for the Northeast. Rob is a nationally recognized expert in the field of employee ownership transitions, assisting business owners and their workers explore, assess, structure, and execute transitions to worker-owned cooperatives, and leads programs at the local, regional, and national level to educate and advise business owners on exit planning process and options.NOTES1 https://portal.census.gov/pulse/data/2 https://www.bizbuysell.com/news /bizbuysell-2021-first-quarter-insight -report/3 See more at https://eoxnetwork.org /statecenters/ or http://becoming employeeowned.org/stories/.4 https://www.fqcf.coop/english/MAINE POLICY REVIEW  •  Vol. 30, No. 2  •  2021 115EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP AND ECONOMIC RECOVERYC O M M E N T A R Y