DIGITAL COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT PLANNING, ACTIVITIES AND EVALUATION OF TANGERANG CITY GOVERNMENT IN INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC RECOVERY IN TANGERANG

172MERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 2022ABSTRACTDIGITAL COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT PLANNING, ACTIVITIES AND EVALUATION OF TANGERANG CITY GOVERNMENT IN INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC RECOVERY IN TANGERANGSaktisyahputra, Yuli Evitha, Degdo Suprayitno, Rd Dancu Lokita Pramesti Dewi, Nadiah AbidinCommunication	Management	Study	Program,	Faculty	of	Social	Sciences	and	Man-agement	STIAMI	Institute	of	Social	Sciences	and	ManagementAuthor Correspondence: Saktinabil@gmail.comMedia	activities	related	to	digitalization	are	present	in	many	aspects	of	daily	life.	Since	the	PSBB	was	passed	on	March	15,	2021,	the	community	has	been	affected	by	the	Covid-19	pandemic.	Community	activities	are	forced	to	 be	 carried	 out	 by	 digital	 transformation	 in	 services,	 transactions	 and	work,	for	example	the	Tangerang	City	Government.	The	goal	of	this	study	was	to	ascertain	how	the	Tangerang	City	Government	will	manage	its	digital	communication	in	order	to	promote	an	inclusive	and	long-lasting	Economic	Recovery	 in	Tangerang.	The	object	of	 this	 research	 is	 the	Tangerang	City	Government.	This	study	uses	 the	method	of	Phenomenology	of	Edmund	Husserl.	 possessing	 the	 idea	of	 phenomenology	 as	 a	 scientific	 approach	that	does	not	begin	with	uncertainty,	direction,	or	the	veracity	of	an	experi-ence.	This	study	used	observation,	interviews,	and	documentation	as	data	gathering	methods.	Based	on	the	research	results,	the	Tangerang	City	Gov-ernment	has	benefited	from	digital	 innovation,	especially	 in	terms	of	 im-proving	communication	and	providing	services	to	local	residents.	Instruc-tions	for	the	use	of	social	media	for	business	for	Micro,	Small	and	Medium	Enterprises	(MSMEs)	are	carried	out	through	training.Keywords: Management, Communication, Digital, Government, Tangerang, City, EconomyCORPORATE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATION173COMMUNICATION, SOCIO-CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVESINTRODUCTIONThe	digitalization	of	media	 through	 the	wide	 internet	gateway	 is	open	 to	all	people.	Most	of	the	world’s	population	is	connected	to	the	internet.	There	are	sev-eral	research	results	that	Indonesia	ranks	one	to	five	as	the	country	with	the	largest	number	of	social	media	to	the	content	that	floods	the	digital	medium.	For	institu-tions	or	organizations,	it	provides	a	kind	of	alternative	for	information	dissemina-tion,	activation,	public	and	business	communication,	as	well	as	public	relations	and	business	activities	for	institutions.	Digital	media	provides	changes	and	even	revolu-tions	 in	 the	 relationship	between	 institutions	and	society.	During	 this	 time,	 com-munication	tends	to	be	dominated	by	one-way	and	broadcast	type,	but	now	it	has	become	 interactivity.	 Institutions	and	audiences	are	entities	 (in	 internet	 language	referred	to	as	nodes)	that	are	comparable,	are	in	the	same	network,	and	can	influ-ence.	For	example,	digital	media	constructs	trust	and	sentiment	through	trending	topics,	viral,	as	well	as	issues	discussed	and	stored	(databases	and	archives)	that	can	be	accessed.	(Nasrullah	2021:	vii	–viii).Sagar	Dua.	2017.	Digital	Communication	Management	The	World	is	Going	Digi-tal.	International	Journal	of	Recent	Research	Aspects	ISSN:	2349-7688,	Vol.	4,	Issue	3,	Sept	2017,	pp.	50-53Digital	media	has	become	the	talk	and	discussion	of	people	in	big	cities.	Tradi-tional	communication	tools	delivered	to	customers	are	very	well	planned	and	stra-tegically	able	to	understand	consumer	potential,	behavior	and	psychology.	A	lot	of	digital	communication	between	management	and	customers	has	emerged	thanks	to	social	media	and	digital	media,	making	transactions	simpler.https://www.ijrra.net/Vol4issue3/IJRRA-04-03-10.pdf	 (Accessed	 6	 July	 2022	23:10	WIB)	Gatut	Priyowidodo,	Chory	Angela	Wijayanti,	Titi	Nur	Vidyarini.	2019.	THE	COM-MUNICATION STRATEGY OF DIGITAL-BASED MEDIA ORGANIZATIONS. JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION	AND	MEDIA	STUDIES	ISSN:	1978-5003	e-ISSN:	2407-6015.According	to	research,	there	are	six	different	types	of	communication	strategies	for	managing	digital	media,	including	communication	management,	using	commu-nication,	carrying	out	communication	planning,	choosing	communication	channels,	directing	the	organization’s	operations,	using	communication	media,	and	involving	various	parties	as	communicators	both	internally	and	externally.	According	to	the	findings	of	the	second	study,	the	company’s	internal	circumstances	and	its	strong	partnerships	with	 third	 parties	were	 the	main	 influences	 on	 the	 development	 of	the	strategy.	Digital	information-based	businesses	depend	on	two	things:	specialists	and	managerial	abilities.file:///C:/Users/hp/Downloads/3272-13376-3-PB.pdf	 (Accessed	on	6	July	2022	at	23.25	WIB)Dinn	Wahyudin,	Deni	Darmawan,	Edi	Suryadi,	Linda	Setiawati,	Yulia	Rahmawati.	2021.	Digital	Strategic	Communication	Management	 in	Developing	Curriculum	of	Universitas	Pendidikan	Indonesia.	Journal	of	Hunan	University	Natural	SciencesBased	on	the	research	findings	that	the	development	of	digital	communication	strategies	for	the	implementation	and	optimization	of	institutional	communication	from	 the	 perspective	 of	 curriculum	development.	 Planning,	 creating,	 and	 assess-174MERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 2022SOCIETY EMPOWERMENT AMIDST THE NEW NORMALing	academic	programs	all	involve	digital	communication.	The	Indonesian	Education	University	(UPI)	conducted	this	study	in	2020.	In	order	to	become	a	top	institution	in	the	sphere	of	education,	UPI	has	implemented	the	curriculum.http://www.jonuns.com/index.php/journal/article/view/769	 (Accessed	 6	 July	2022	at	23.39	WIB)Nindyta	Aisyah	Dwityas1,	Ahmad	Mulyana2, Sri Hesti3,	Rizki	Briandana4, Putrianti Mungi	Kurniasari5.	2020.	Digital	Marketing	Communication	Strategies:	The	Case	of	Indonesian	News	Portals.	International	Journal	of	Economics	and	Business	Adminis-tration	Volume	VIII,	Issue	3,	2020	Page	307-316Focused	goals	will	be	the	major	 focus	of	digital	marketing	 in	2019	according	to	Kompas.id’s	communication	strategy.	This	study	suggests	promoting	digital	ele-ments	 throughout	 the	entire	 implementation	phase	as	well	as	 those	 that	emerge	in	 the	communication	mix.	A	digital	 strategy	 is	necessary	 in	order	 to	plan	digital	marketing,	choose	targets,	select	channels,	decide	on	a	total	budget,	select	digital	communication	instruments,	and	assess	the	effectiveness	of	the	marketing	commu-nication process.file:///C:/Users/hp/Downloads/Digital%20Marketing%20Communication%20Strategies_%20%20The%20Case%20of%20Indonesian%20News%E2%80%98%20Portals.pdf	(Accessed	7	July	2022	at	14.14	WIB)ROBIN	 MANSELL.	 W.	 EDWARD	 STEINMUELLER.	 2020.	 Denaturalizing	 Digital	Platforms:	Is	Mass	Individualization	Here	to	Stay?	International	Journal	of	Communi-cation	16(2022),	461–481Consistency	of	individualization	or	personalization	is	used	by	digital	platforms	with	imaginary	and	neoclassical	logic	of	economic	theory	and	behavioral	economics.	It	identifies	contemporary	policy	limitations	to	the	hazards	associated	with	datafica-tion	practices.	Denaturalization	claims	need	 to	be	made	 regarding	 the	 increasing	“natural”	mass	individualization	techniques	of	market	dynamics	and	digital	technol-ogy	innovations.	(Accessed	July	7,	2022	at	2:41	p.m.	WIB)A	Rizaldi1,	 F	Margareta2*, K Simehate3,	 S	N	Hikmah4,	C	N	Albar5, A A Rafdhi6. 2021.	Digital	Marketing	as	a	Marketing	Communication	Strategy.	International	Jour-nal	of	Research	and	Applied	Technology1	Page	61-69The	use	of	digital	marketing	has	the	potential	to	boost	the	market	for	organic	fertilizer	by	attracting	more	customers.	According	to	study,	digital	marketing	as	a	kind	of	marketing	communication	boosts	promotion	and	selling	power.	The	findings	of	his	study	cover	the	application	of	digital	marketing	in	the	promotion	of	products	for	organic	fertilizer.https://ojs.unikom.ac.id/index.php/injuratech/article/view/5639/2626 (Accessed on	7	July	2022	at	23:53	WIB)Dam	Hee	Kim,	Meera	Desai.	2021.	 Is	Social	Media	Worth	 It	 for	News	Media?	Explaining	News	Engagement	on	Tumblr	and	Digital	Traffic	of	News	Websites.	Inter-national	Journal	on	Media	Management	Volume	23,	2021	-	Issue	1-2.Financial	challenges	 in	the	era	of	digital	 technology	have	attracted	audiences	through	social	media.	Social	media	is	often	seen	by	the	public	as	a	digital	strategy,	then	directs	 it	 to	the	main	web	to	carry	out	sales	promotions.	Digital	 traffic	from	CORPORATE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATION175COMMUNICATION, SOCIO-CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVESthe	top	50	news	organizations	was	230,375	posts	made	by	the	organization’s	41	ac-counts	on	the	social	media	platform,	Tumblr.https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14241277.2021.1958820?scroll=top&needAccess=true	(Accessed	July	8,	2022	at	00.09	WIBDanilo	Tauro,	Umberto	Panniello,	Roberta	Pellegrino.	2021.	Risk	Management	in	Digital	Advertising:	An	Analysis	from	the	Advertisers’	Media	Management	Perspec-tive.	International	Journal	on	Media	Management	Volume	23,	2021	-	Issue	1-2.Media	management	carries	out	advertising	promotions,	after	creative	content	is	produced.	Distribution	 channels	 control	 the	process	of	developing	promotions	through	advertising	to	efficiently	and	effectively	reach	the	proper	target	audience.	According	to	the	findings	of	this	five-year	study,	new	technologies	have	disrupted	this	market	and	aided	in	the	astronomical	rise	of	digital	advertising.	https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14241277.2021.1960532 (Ac-cessed	on	8	July	2022	at	00.24	WIB)Dewi	K	Soedarsono,	Bahtiar	Mohamad,	Adamu	Abbas	Adamu,	Kennia	Aline	Pra-dita.	2020.	Managing	Digital	Marketing	Communication	of	Coffee	Shop	Using	Ins-tagram.	International	Journal	of	 Interactive	Mobile	Technologies	(iJIM),	14(05),	pp.	108–118.Owners,	marketing	personnel,	and	consultants	with	experience	managing	digital	marketing	communication	strategies	have	participated	in	semi-structured	interviews	to	obtain	 in-depth	knowledge.	The	Instagram	app	turns	become	a	powerful	mar-keting	tool	for	promoting	sales.	https://online-journals.org/index.php/i-jim/article/view/13351	(Accessed	on	July	8,	2022	at	0.37	WIB)The	development	of	digital	media	makes	communication	more	innovative	and	creative.	All	levels	of	society	are	required	to	recognize	and	understand	digital	media.	Due	to	the	PSBB	which	was	enforced	during	Covid-19,	many	activities	were	carried	out	online.	Starting	from	school,	work,	buying	and	selling	transactions,	and	others.Alfelia	Nugky	Permatasari,	Endang	Soelistiyowati,	I	Gusti	Ayu	Putu	Puji	Suastami,	Riski	Apriliani	Johan.	2021.	Digital	Public	Relations:	Trends	and	Required	Skills.	AS-PIKOM	Journal.	Vol	6.	No	2.The	public	relations	industry	uses	digital	media	as	well	and	looks	at	digital	pub-lic	 relations	skills.	To	achieve	this	goal,	a	number	of	public	 relations	professionals	from	various	institutes	were	questioned.	Organizations	still	require	traditional	and	digital	public	relations	because	they	complement	one	another	well.	Additionally,	to	possess	strong	interpersonal,	writing,	communication,	and	soft	skills.	Expected	to	be	knowledgeable	about	and	skilled	with	digital	platforms.https://jurnalaspikom.org/index.php/aspikom/article/view/836  (Accessed on 12	July	2022	at	0.53	WIB)The	aim	of	this	study	is	to	determine	the	Tangerang	City	Government’s	efforts	in	inclusive	and	sustainable	economic	recovery	through	digital	communication	man-agement	planning,	activities,	and	evaluation	based	on	the	description	of	the	prob-lem	above.METHODOLOGYThis	study	uses	the	method	of	Phenomenology	of	Edmund	Husserl.	Husserl	as-serted	that	not	only	research	but	philosophy	of	theory	or	philosophy	of	science.	The	176MERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 2022SOCIETY EMPOWERMENT AMIDST THE NEW NORMALmethod	used	to	find	out	from	his	experience	actually	becomes	the	truth	he	experi-ences.	Method	is	to	be	viewed	here	not	as	a	research	technique	but	rather	in	the	etymological	sense	of	a	way	to	enter	a	research	topic,	which	implies	that	those	issues	fall	under	the	purview	of	science	theory	or	philosophy.According	to	Husserl,	the	method	of	achieving	eidetic	knowledge	is	knowledge	of	reality.	So,	 intentionality	or	directness	to	objective	knowledge	 is	a	 formal	goal.	The	fact	that	the	same	object	appears	in	different	ways	is	totally	attributable	to	ap-perceptive	characteristics,	which	are	intentionally	used	to	denote	the	presentational	and	objectifying	function	of	awareness.Practicing	 the	phenomenological	method,	 the	non-essential	elements	are	 re-duced	through	epoche.	By	placing	non-essential	elements	to	consciousness	to	cap-ture	 the	meaning	 and	 understanding	 of	 reality	 (Poespowardojo	 and	 Seran	 2018:	152-153).Planned	communication	is	an	important	part	of	the	digital	communication	me-dia	management	process.	Communication	management	can	be	defined	as	public	relations	 activities	 and	 accompanying	 activities	 to	 run	programs,	 campaigns,	 and	projects	 (Kirk	Hallahan	 in	Heath,	2013:	153)	 (Nasrullah	2021:	87).	 In	simple	 terms,	planning	 can	 be	 grouped	 into	 four	 clusters	 of	 digital	 communication	 activities,	namely	promotion,	conversion,	strategy,	content:StrategyThe	first	activity	is	conducting	market	research.	This	is	done	by	determining	the	target,	segmentation,	age,	situation	or	demographics.	The	second	activity	carries	out	campaign	goals	(campaign	goals).	The	third	activity	of	the	publication	channel,	this	is	done	by	analyzing	social	media,	publication	channels,	types	of	content	on	social	media.	The	fourth	activity	determines	promotion	channels.	The	fifth	stage	is	to	de-termine the main performance indicators (KPIs).ContentCreating	 content	 by	means	 of	 Keyword	Analysis,	 something	 that	 is	 currently	popular	 in	 the	 community.	 Keywords	will	 be	optimized	on	 social	media.	 Content	planning	defined	campaign	content	outline,	content	calendar.	The	next	stage	is	con-tent	creation.	Content	writing	according	to	the	selection	of	the	right	hashtags,	con-tent	according	to	SEO,	social	media	algorithms.PromotionPromotion	used	can	be	in	the	form	of	Organic	Media.	Drafting	email	blast,	IG	Story,	FB	Story,	Facebook	Page,	Newsletter,	Content	Template.	Paid	Promotion	can	also	be	done	using	Google	Ads,	Facebook	Ads,	Instagram	Ads.ConversionConversion	activities	are	 carried	out	by	 following	up	on	action.	Subjects	 that	engage	audiences	in	events,	seminars,	webinars,	product	sales,	discounts,	quizzes,	videos,	content,	and	more.	Media	Offer	will	prepare	a	landing	page	as	a	conversion	link	that	is	distributed	on	social	media	and	other	digital	media.	(Nasrullah	2021:	94)CORPORATE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATION177COMMUNICATION, SOCIO-CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVESEvaluation in Digital CommunicationThe	 institution’s	digital	communication	management	will	evaluate	the	perfor-mance	that	has	been	carried	out.	Evaluation	is	also	interpreted	as	monitoring	and	feedback.	The	managers	of	digital	communication	media	 in	 the	human	resources	department	 do	 special	 things	 to	 handle	 digital	 communications.	 Create	 a	 digital	communication	plan	and	carry	out	the	execution	of	the	plan,	to	the	desired	output,	impact,	and	results.	(Nasrullah	2021:	162)The	objects	 used	 as	 informants	 in	 this	 research	 are	Mr.	Hendy	 Tannady	 as	 a	Digital	Communication	Practitioner	of	 IEEEL	 Institute	domiciled	 in	Tangerang	City	and	Mrs.	Zakiah	as	a	citizen	of	Tangerang	City.	The	total	number	of	informants	is	two	people.	This	informant	is	seen	to	represent	what	the	researcher	wants	to	study	and	is	selected	based	on	the	context	that	the	researcher	wants	to	discuss	in	this	study.The	quality	of	the	research	instrument	and	the	quality	of	data	collection	were	the	two	key	terms	used	to	describe	the	study’s	findings.	The	validity	and	dependabil-ity	of	the	research	instrument	determine	its	quality,	and	the	procedures	employed	to	gather	the	data	determine	the	quality	of	the	data	collection.Data	collection	is	done	naturally	(natural	setting),	in	the	laboratory	with	experi-mental	methods,	at	home,	seminar	meetings,	discussions,	and	others.	The	technique	of	 collecting	 is	 done	 by	 questionnaire,	 observation,	 interview,	 and	 collaboration.	(Sugiyono	2021:	253)In	qualitative	research,	data	processing	happens	concurrently	with	data	gather-ing.	Researchers	conduct	interviews,	and	if	the	results	of	the	interview	feel	unsatis-factory	after	being	examined,	the	researcher	will	keep	asking	questions	until	 they	have	obtained	information	that	is	deemed	credible.	According	to	Miles	&	Huberman	(1992),	 operations	 in	 qualitative	 data	 analysis	were	 carried	 out	 in	 a	 collaborative	manner.	Data	reduction,	data	visualization,	and	data	verification	are	all	components	of	data	analysis.In	qualitative	research,	conclusions	may	or	may	not	provide	an	answer	to	the	original	question.	The	results	of	qualitative	research	are	anticipated	to	produce	nov-el,	previously	undiscovered	information	or	to	supplement	known	information.	The	results	are	presented	as	a	description	or	description	of	the	study’s	subject.	 (Mirza	2018:	105-107)RESULT AND DISCUSSIONResearchers	conducted	interviews	with	key	informant	Mr.	Dr.	Hendy	Tannady,	a	35-year-old	Digital	Communication	Practitioner	from	the	IEEEL	Institute,	lives	in	Puri	Beta	1,	 Tanjung	5/16,	Tangerang	City.	Conceptually,	 communication	management	can	be	defined	as	a	set	of	techniques	used	in	public	relations	activities	and	accom-panying	activities	to	run	programs,	campaigns,	or	projects	(Kirk	Hallahan	in	Heath,	2013:	153)	(Nasrullah	2021:	87).	There	is	no	feeling	of	Digital	Communication	Plan-ning	in	the	Tangerang	City	Government	to	help	develop	the	potential	and	economic	recovery	in	Tangerang	City.	This	is	in	accordance	with	the	statement	of	Mr.	Dr.	Hendy	Tannady	as	follows“In	my	opinion,	the	Tangerang	City	Government’s	program,	especially	the	digital	communication	 plan,	 is	 at	 least	 helpful,	 let	 alone	 developing	 the	 potential	 and	restoring	the	economy	in	Tangerang	City.	The	presence	of	private	developer	com-178MERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 2022SOCIETY EMPOWERMENT AMIDST THE NEW NORMALpanies	 in	 Tangerang,	 such	 as	 in	 Karawaci,	makes	 the	 economic	growth	of	 local	residents	more	significant	than	the	action	plan	formulated	by	the	Tangerang	City	Government.”Digital	communication	activities	can	be	grouped	into	four	clusters,	namely	strat-egy,	content,	promotion,	and	conversion	(Nasrullah	2021:	94).	Digital	communica-tion	activities	should	target	these	four	clusters.	This	is	in	accordance	with	the	state-ment	of	Mr.	Dr.	Hendy	Tannady	as	follows“Digital	communication	activities	should	target	the	four	clusters.	Market	research	is	absolutely	necessary	 to	 identify	 the	basic	needs	of	business	actors,	especially	Micro,	Small	and	Medium	Enterprises	in	Tangerang.	Promotional	and	conversion	content	in	digital-based	designs	considering	the	demographics	of	the	Tangerang	population,	which	is	also	a	lot	of	Generation	Z	and	Millennials.	There	is	also	a	need	for	action	to	go	to	the	field	to	provide	socialization	and	training	for	conventional	business	actors	about	digital	literacy	and	the	use	of	digital	technology	to	support	business.”The	importance	of	periodic	evaluations	from	time	to	time	so	that	digital	com-munication	planning	is	more	touching	and	answering	public	problems	in	Tangerang	City.	In	the	final	stage	of	digital	communication	management,	the	institution	con-ducts	an	evaluation.	Evaluation	is	also	interpreted	as	monitoring	and	also	seeking	feedback.	 The	management	 of	 digital	 communication	media,	 as	 discussed	 in	 the	human	resources	section,	is	carried	out	by	a	section	that	specifically	handles	digital	communications.	It	is	the	managers	themselves	who	know	better	how	a	digital	com-munication	plan	is	made,	how	to	execute	the	plan,	to	the	desired	output,	 impact,	and	results.	(Nasrullah	2021:	162).	This	is	in	accordance	with	the	statement	of	Mr.	Dr.	Hendy	Tannady	as	follows“Regarding	the	execution	of	the	evaluation,	I	cannot	identify	this	because	I	do	not	understand	the	internal	mechanisms	of	the	Tangerang	City	Government	in	the	De-termination,	Implementation,	Evaluation	(Implementation),	Control	(Implementa-tion)	(PPEPP),	especially	evaluation.	However,	it	is	better	to	serve	the	community,	continuous	improvement	needs	to	be	done	in	order	to	achieve	governance	objec-tives,	namely	community	satisfaction	with	the	performance	of	the	Tangerang	City	Government apparatus. The most important part of continuous improvement is periodic	evaluation	from	time	to	time	and	a	Plan,	Do,	Check,	Act	(PDCA)	is	carried	out	so	that	digital	communication	planning	is	more	touching	and	answers	public	problems	in	the	city	of	Tangerang.”The	researcher	also	conducted	interviews	with	the	informant,	Mr.	Dr.	Joko	Su-warno	Dwi	Raharjo	Digital	Communication	Practitioner,	President	Director	of	PT.	Tal-enta	Scholar,	54	years	old,	lives	in	Serpong	Park	Cluster	Amethyst	Block	A.	1	No.	16	Lengkong	Karya,	North	 Serpong,	 South	 Tangerang.	 Conceptually,	 communication	management	can	be	defined	as	a	set	of	techniques	used	in	public	relations	activities	and	accompanying	activities	to	run	programs,	campaigns,	or	projects	(Kirk	Hallahan	in	Heath,	2013:	153)	 (Nasrullah	2021:	87).	Digital	communication	planning	carried	out	by	the	Tangerang	City	Government	is	quite	good	in	digital	innovation,	especially	in	order	to	facilitate	communication	and	services	to	the	community.	This	is	in	accor-dance	with	the	statement	of	Mr.	Dr.	Joko	as	follows“I	think	the	Tangerang	City	Government’s	plan	is	quite	good	in	digital	innovation,	especially	 in	 order	 to	 facilitate	 communication	 and	 services	 to	 the	 community.	This	is	proven	in	2020	the	Tangerang	City	Government	received	several	awards	in	the	development	of	Smart	City,	this	effort	can	at	least	make	it	easier	for	example	in	the	management	of	permits	for	business	actors	who	are	not	long-winded	and	CORPORATE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATION179COMMUNICATION, SOCIO-CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVESthe	time	is	not	so	long	as	well	as	in	terms	of	population	management	which	has	provided	ATM	KTP	in	several	places.	Then	based	on	media	information	on	July	5,	2022,	the	Tangerang	City	Government	held	training	for	Micro,	Small	and	Medium	Enterprises	(MSMEs)	in	the	use	of	social	media	for	business.	I	think	these	are	some	serious	efforts	for	the	Tangerang	City	Government	during	the	pandemic	and	post-pandemic	in	carrying	out	economic	recovery.”CONCLUSIONThe	 Tangerang	 City	 Government	 has	 implemented	 Digital	 Communication	Management	both	from	Planning,	Activities,	and	Evaluation	in	Inclusive	and	Sustain-able	Economic	Recovery	through	digital	innovation,	especially	in	order	to	facilitate	communication	and	services	in	society,	according	to	the	data	findings,	data	results,	and	discussions	that	the	researchers	have	conveyed.	Instruction	on	the	use	of	so-cial	media	 for	business	 for	Micro,	Small,	and	Medium-Sized	Enterprises	 (MSMEs).	The	 researcher	also	has	 several	 recommendations,	namely:	Cooperation	with	pri-vate	developer	companies	such	as	 in	Karawaci	will	 increase	the	economic	growth	of	Tangerang	residents.	Both	promotional	and	conversion	content	are	digital-based	designs	considering	the	demographics	of	the	Tangerang	population,	which	is	also	a	lot	of	Generation	Z	and	Millennials.	The	three	periodic	evaluations	are	carried	out	from	time	 to	 time	and	carried	out	by	Plan,	Do,	Check,	Act	 (PDCA)	so	 that	digital	communication	planning	is	more	touching	and	answers	public	problems	in	the	city	of	Tangerang.”REFERENCESBOOK :Nasrullah.	Rulli.	2021.	Manajemen	Komunikasi	Digital	Perencanaan,	Aktivitas,	dan	Evaluasi.	Jakarta.	Prenada	Media	GroupPoespowardojo	dan	Seran.	2016.	Filsafat	Ilmu	Pengetahuan	Hakikat	Ilmu	Pengetahuan,	Kri-tik	Terhadap	Visi	Positivisme	Logis,	serta	Implikasinya.	Jakarta.	PT.	Kompas	Media	Nu-santaraRonda.	Mirza.	2018.	Tafsir	Kontemporer	Ilmu	Komunikasi	Tinjauan	Teoritis	Epistemologi		Ak-siologi.	Jakarta.	Indigo	Media	bekerja	sama	dengan	Yayasan	Kompatibel.Sugiyono	dan	Lestari.	2021.	Metode	Penelitian	Komunikasi	(Kuantitatif,	Kualitatif,	dan	Cara	Mudah	Menulis	Artikel	pada	Jurnal	Internasional.	Bandung.	AlfabetaJOURNAL:Dam	Hee	Kim,	Meera	Desai.	2021.	Are	Social	Media	Worth	It	for	News	Media?:	Explaining	News	Engagement	on	Tumblr	and	Digital	Traffic	of	News	Websites.	International	Jour-nal	on	Media	Management	Volume	23,	2021	-	Issue	1-2	https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14241277.2021.1958820?scroll=top&needAccess=true (Accessed on 12	July	2022	00.09	AM)Danilo	Tauro,	Umberto	Panniello,	Roberta	Pellegrino.	2021.	Risk	Management	in	Digital	Ad-vertising:	An	Analysis	from	the	Advertisers’	Media	Management	Perspective.	Interna-tional	Journal	on	Media	Management	Volume	23,	2021	-	Issue	1-2	https://www.tand-fonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14241277.2021.1960532	(Accessed	on	12	July	2022	0.24	AM)Dinn	Wahyudin,	Deni	Darmawan,	Edi	Suryadi,	Linda	Setiawati,	Yulia	Rahmawati.	2021.	Digital	Strategic	Communication	Management	in	Developing	Curriculum	of	Universitas	Pendi-180MERCU BUANA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COMMUNICATION SCIENCE 2022SOCIETY EMPOWERMENT AMIDST THE NEW NORMALdikan	Indonesia.	Journal	of	Hunan	University	Natural	Sciences	http://www.jonuns.com/index.php/journal/article/view/769	(Accessed	on	3	July	2022	11.00	PM)Gatut	Priyowidodo,	Chory	Angela	Wijayanti,	Titi	Nur	Vidyarini.	2019.	THE	COMMUNICATION	STRATEGY OF DIGITAL-BASED MEDIA ORGANIZATIONS. JURNAL STUDI KOMUNIKASI DAN	MEDIA	ISSN:	1978-5003	e-ISSN:	2407-6015.	file:///C:/Users/hp/Downloads/3272-13376-3-PB.pdf	(Accessed	on	3	July	2022	11.05	PM)Nindyta	Aisyah	Dwityas1,	Ahmad	Mulyana2, Sri Hesti3,	Rizki	Briandana4,	Putrianti	Mungi	Kur-niasari5.	 2020.	Digital	Marketing	Communication	 Strategies:	 The	Case	 of	 Indonesian	News’	Portals.	International	Journal	of	Economics	and	Business	Administration	Volume	VIII,	 Issue	 3,	 2020	 Page	 307-316	 file:///C:/Users/hp/Downloads/Digital%20Market-ing%20Communication%20Strategies_%20%20The%20Case%20of%20Indonesian%20News%E2%80%98%20Portals.pdf	(Accessed	on	3	July	2022	11.10	PM)Robin	Mansell.	W.	Edward	Steinmueller.	2020.	Denaturalizing	Digital	Platforms:	Is	Mass	Indi-vidualization	Here	to	Stay?.	International	Journal	of	Communication	16(2022),	461–481	file:///C:/Users/hp/Downloads/13093-61223-1-PB.pdf	(Accessed	on	3	July	2022	11.15	PM)Sagar	Dua.	2017.	Digital	Communication	Management	The	World	is	Going	Digital.	Interna-tional	Journal	of	Recent	Research	Aspects	ISSN:	2349-7688,	Vol.	4,	Issue	3,	Sept	2017,	pp.	 50-53	 https://www.ijrra.net/Vol4issue3/IJRRA-04-03-10.pdf	 (Accessed	 on	 3	 July	2022	11.19	PM)