Regional Resilience: Opportunities, Challenges And Policy Messages From Western North Carolina

Archived version from NCDOCKS Institutional Repository http://libres.uncg.edu/ir/asu/ Regional Resilience: Opportunities, Challenges And Policy Messages From Western North CarolinaBy: Susan Slocum and Carol KlineAbstractThis paper explores resiliency theory by assessing the ability of communities to adapt and recover economically and socially after a natural disaster. Community resiliency describes the capacity of finding a new equilibrium that is strengthened from change. Resilience can be seen as a strategy to facilitate recovery after a trauma and can be used as a preventative measure to avoid undesired outcomes. Through a qualitative assessment of the HandMade in America programme in three rural communities in Western North Carolina, this paper draws attention to the facilitation of community capital, resulting in social and political networks that allowed these towns to rely on increases in tourism to rebound from the 2004 hurricanes season.Slocum S, Kline C. Regional resilience: opportunities, challenges and policy messages from Western North Carolina. Anatolia: An International Journal of Tourism & Hospitality Research. 2014;25(3):403-416. doi:10.1080/13032917.2014.888673. Publisher version of record available at: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13032917.2014.888673Regional resilience: opportunities, challenges and policy messagesfrom Western North CarolinaSusan Slocuma* and Carol KlinebaDepartment of Applied Economics, Utah State University, 4835 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84322,USA; bDepartment of Recreation and Leisure Studies, Center for Sustainable Tourism,East Carolina University, RW Rivers 208, Greenville, NC 27858-4354, USAThis paper explores resiliency theory by assessing the ability of communities to adaptand recover economically and socially after a natural disaster. Community resiliencydescribes the capacity of finding a new equilibrium that is strengthened from change.Resilience can be seen as a strategy to facilitate recovery after a trauma and can be usedas a preventative measure to avoid undesired outcomes. Through a qualitative assessmentof the HandMade in America programme in three rural communities in Western NorthCarolina, this paper draws attention to the facilitation of community capital, resulting insocial and political networks that allowed these towns to rely on increases in tourism torebound from the 2004 hurricanes season.Keywords: resilience; natural disaster; sustainability; North Carolina; craftsIntroductionCommunities are influenced by external forces which fall outside the control of regional ornational regulatory structures and can be accelerated through globalized processes(Church, 2004). These forces include changing patterns of industrial development whichinfluence rural spatial patterns and cause stress on communities and traditional industries.Many theorists agree that over-dependence on monofunctional agricultural productionleads to economic dependency and increasing poverty (Chaskin, 2008; Rigg, 2006).Agriculture no longer forms the backbone for rural development; instead rural spaces arecharacterized by complex, multidimensional and hybrid development (Saxena, Clark,Oliver, & Ilbery, 2007). Once the mainstay of rural development, agriculture is beingreplaced by emerging industries such as tourism.Multifaceted development patterns influence migration, decrease the availability ofcapital to rural areas and create a larger command and control regulatory system thatgoverns rural spaces. In addition, there is a constant struggle between the inherited naturallandscapes, often derived from obsolete practices which are no longer viable, andpressures to conform to certain economic and social trends (Piorr, 2003). Outwardmigration from rural areas is viewed as a negative impact that diminishes human capital,and greying communities find it increasingly difficult to incorporate modern technologiesand progressive ideas into land-use planning (Pretty, 2002). Decreasing capital forcescommunity members into the poverty trap where they struggle to raise sufficient capitaland income for survival, leaving little time or resources to diversify economically. Making*Corresponding author. Current address: Department of Tourism and Event Management, GeorgeMason University, 10900 University Blvd. MSN 4E5, Manassas, VA 20110, USA. Email:sslocum@gmu.eduright and wrong development decisions are becoming more difficult and complex.Therefore, an understanding of community capacity, through the theoretical construct ofcommunity resilience, provides new insight into community evolution, adaption to changeand the dynamisms of global environments.Seldom approached in tourism analysis, resilience theory is a vital tool in thesustainability assessment tool box (Wilson, 2010) and has gained recent recognition inacademic articles addressing crises management, land use policy, social capacity, andagriculture. Using data from three rural North Carolina communities affected by the 2004hurricane season, this case study argues that through theHandMade inAmerica programme,community resiliency was instilled that supported the economic and social recovery efforts.In particular, the development of the craft industry and the Small Town Program that helpedrevitalize a number of historic buildings and parks assisted these three communities to relyon the increase in tourism to rebound from the natural disasters that affected them.Literature reviewResilience theory was originally used to describe the ability of a system to return toequilibrium after a trauma (Norris, Stevens, Pfefferbaum, Wyche, & Pfefferbaum, 2008)and has been used to assess the capabilities of environments (Gunderson, 2000),individuals (Boss, 2001), and families (Landau, 2007) facing multiple transitions andstresses. However, its use in the assessment of communities is relatively new in academicliterature. Community resilience describes the ability of a community to adapt to changeand, rather than returning to a previous steady state, to find a new equilibrium that isstrengthened from the experience (Matthews & Selman, 2006). As resilience can beexplained as “a process linking a set of adaptive capacities to a positive trajectory offunctioning and adaptation after a disturbance” (Norris et al., 2008, p. 130), the definitionof community resilience is the existence, development, and engagement of communityresources by community members to thrive in an environment characterized by change,uncertainty, unpredictability, and surprise (Magis, 2010).Resilience should be viewed as a positive adaptive response to adversity where actorscan draw on natural, human, cultural, social, financial, built, and political capital tonegotiate change (Ahmed, Seedat, van Niekerk, & Bulbulia, 2004). While resilience canbe seen as a strategy to facilitate recovery after a traumatic event, it can also be used as apreventative measure to avoid poor outcomes. Therefore, resilience is not aboutcontrolling conditions, but developing a community’s ability to respond to change(Ahmed et al., 2004). It includes community learning and the ability of a community totake responsibility and control over their development pathways.Resiliency provides opportunities for communities to adopt strategies that complementtheir particular environments and reinforces feedback loops resulting in socially preferredoutcomes (Cutter et al., 2008). Resilience allows communities to develop multi-industryeconomies and reduces dependency on global agricultural markets. In turn, this increasesemployment and business opportunities, reduces poverty and increases the quality of life forresidents (Pretty, 2002). It can increase local business ownership and create newmarkets andtechnologies for local production, decreasing economic leakages (Lyson, 2004) whileempowering families in non-traditional industries (Rigg, 2006). Resilience decreases relianceon outside agencies, including the need for subsidies, increases autonomy and providesavenues for new learning and knowledge exchange between groups (Goss & Burch, 2001).There are a number of challenges in implementing the resilience model. Resiliencerequires strong leadership and may compel members to develop new skill sets to becomeeffective leaders and to facilitate cooperation between different groups (Wilson, 2010).Sometimes a major shift in the power structure may be required. In addition, capitals areoften intertwined, which can result in unintended side effects as elements of the system arechanged. Modernization practices require a new perspective on the use of resources,technologies, business models and can alter historic traditions (Matthews & Selman,2006). Therefore, communities need a forward vision, learning how to adapt to changingenvironments, working within dynamic markets rather than seeking immediate results.Waller (2001) argues that resilience should be viewed as adaptability and that stability,or the failure to change, is a lack of resilience. Communities should move beyond“stability” models and towards “symbiotic” models of development (Kelly & Bliss, 2009).Table 1 explains the eight dimensions that contribute to the community reliance process.Using data from a number of communities in North Carolina, this paper introducesresilience theory as a means to understand and assess individual communities’ ability toforge through the changing nature of tourism as a development tool.Applications of resilience theoryResilience theory was first introduced through the psychology and sociology disciplines asa means to describe the human response to adversity and the coping mechanism utilizedfor recovery (Sonn & Fisher, 1998). Cottrell (1976) approached community competenceas a means to provide opportunities that allow groups within a community to cope withtheir problems, and Elsass (1992) expanded by challenging that oppressed communitiesfaced the inability to develop the social and psychological support structures that allowsfor involvement and the development of activities and social relationships.Community resilience was first utilized to gauge a region’s response to varying naturalresource uses and stewardships. Piorr (2003) recognized that landscape practices (oftenbased on agro-landscapes) create the character, distinctiveness and ecological diversity thatderive the cultural landscape. Matthews and Selman (2006) argue that it is these economicactivities and landscape practices that drive change, and refer to “vicious circles” as being“characterized by obsolescence of traditional production, processing and marketingmethods, and which could result either in extreme intensification or virtual abandonment”(p. 200). They choose to endorse “virtuous circles” which promote place-qualities and “a‘landscape premium’ emerges in which people benefit economically from doing things thatenhance multiple landscape functions, which, in turn, supply further services that enhancequality of life and economic opportunity” (p. 201). Resilience only plays a role in creatingvirtuous circles if a community is in a desired state of attraction, but is viewed as adisadvantage if in flux. Varghese, Krogman, Beckley, and Nadeau (2006) stress theimportance of community resilience because it more directly addresses entitlements andhow the human use of resources is distributed through institutions. Varghese et al. (2006)challenge Matthews and Selman by stating that “community resiliency refers to howcommunities adapt at times of vulnerability when altered property rights or access toresources threaten the continuation of current levels of wellbeing” (p. 508).Atterton (2007) discovered mixed results in assessing community resilience andresponsiveness to change. In a study of businesses in Scotland, she found that tight socialnetworks in remote areas may hamper the economic growth of a region. It appeared thatthe influx of migration increased a broader spectrum of community ties that enhanced thesuccess of business development, whereas tightly structured local ties resulted in “a lack ofopenness to different information through extra-local weak ties, a high degree ofinflexibility, a lack of adaptability and a situation where social norms and obligations mayTable 1. The eight community resilience dimensions.Dimensions Justification Associated metricsUtilization ofcommunityresourcesEngaging natural, human,cultural, social, financial,built, and political capital(1) The understanding of the opportunities andlimitations of the natural environmentsurrounding the community(2) The extent community leaders are networkedwith resources outside the community(3) The extent community members believe thatchange is inevitable and that the communitycan adapt successfullyDevelopment ofcommunityresourcesRequires action taken, notsimply the capacity to act(1) The new kinds of business and employmentopportunities developed over the last 10 years(2) The preparedness of youth with developedwork habits and becoming involved citizens,empowered to take action and advocate ideasand concerns(3) The extent to which communities affected bychange try new ways of doing thingsEngagementof communityresourcesObjectives that developcommunity resilience,and generates additionalresources and capacity(1) The effectiveness of community governmentin dealing with important problems facing thecommunity(2) The extent to which community organizationscontribute leadership and volunteers tocommunity endeavours(3) The extent to which communities generateideas to address change that are new and thatinvolve recombining resources in differentand creative waysActive agents Influencing its well-beingand taking a leadershiprole(1) Community members’ belief in their ability toaffect the community’s well-being(2) Community members’ involvement in variousgroups and events(3) Community’s self-reliance in addressingmajor issues and changes affecting thecommunityCollectiveactionDiverse and autonomousgroups work together,know what organizationsand people are important,and how to accomplishtheir objective(1) The extent to which community leadersfacilitate collaboration between groups towork on community objectives(2) The extent to which community decision-making processes engage diverse perspectivesand reflect cultural differences(3) The extent to which people from diversegroups share supports, resources, knowledge,and expertise when confronted with changeStrategic action Developed throughconscious deliberation,planning, implemen-tation, and learning(1) The extent to which information oncommunity resources is used in planningcommunity endeavours(2) The extent to which local planning processesgenerate a communitywide commitment to acommon future(3) The extent to which community members lookoutside the community to find resources tosupport its endeavours(Continued)override economic arguments” (p. 240). Shava, Krasny, Tidball, and Zazu (2010) echothese sentiment through a study of rural to urban migration and resettlement in SouthAfrica, claiming that the infusion of multiethnic values and practices combined with awidespread network of social ties has increased community resilience in the face ofglobalization and economic struggle. Both authors admit that a supportive policy structureshould be in place to encourage traditional values while bringing knowledge into thecommunities facing change.Community resilience has only recently been applied to tourism-based communities.Initially, resilience was used to describe a tourism industry’s response to outside threats.Pearce (2001) used the concept to assess the ability of the New Zealand tourism industry toadapt to the Asian financial crises through the expansion of the newly formed NewZealand Tourism Board. Zeng, Carter, and De Lacy (2005) claim that the natural resilienceof tourism as an economic sector helped mitigate the effect SARS had on tourism in Chinaand that through increased destination marketing and the reassessment of destinationimage, post-crises recovery was enhanced. Calgaro and Lloyd (2008) developed a modelto assess which socio-political and environmental conditions most negatively affected therecovery of Khao Lak, Thailand, after the tsunami and which attributes could contributetowards the long-term resilience of similar communities. They found that reliance onoutside large-scale tourism businesses and limited diversification and seasonality of thetourism product were the main areas of vulnerability.Recent articles have approached sustainable tourism froma resiliency perspective.Tyrrelland Johnston (2007) defined resilience as “the dynamics of community environmental quality(or character) subject to visitor-induced degradation” (p. 17) and concluded that differentsizes, types and levels of infrastructure development play a key role. Maroudas, Kyriakaki,and Gouvis (2004), in an attempt to reduce negative impacts of seasonal mountain tourism,determine that clear policy guidelines that incorporate community involvement can helpreduce these negative impacts by generating new avenues to increase the tourism season andTable 1 – continuedDimensions Justification Associated metrics(4) Opportunities for people to share lessons,unresolved questions, ideas and innovationsfrom their experiencesEquity Ensures open access andequal opportunity,enables the developmentand engagement ofresources from the entirecommunity(1) Access of various groups to the community’snatural resources(2) Involvement of various groups in the planningand leadership of the community(3) The extent to which community organizationswelcome and include various groupsImpact The successfulimplementation of plans,the development of newtrajectories and futures,and the adaptation tochanges within andoutside the community(1) The changes in participation and collaborationover time(2) The changes in number and variety of externalcontacts over time(3) Changes in the community’s capacity overtime to respond to change, develop newfutures for itself, and develop and implementcommunity-centred plans(4) Changes in the community’s resources overtimeSource: Adapted from Magis (2010).create a more even pattern of visitation. They conclude by saying, “The cohesion and welfareof the local community and the existence of networks between business units of thecommunity, nongovernmental organizations and research centers are essential forendogenous and sustainable tourism development” (p. 17). Scheyvens and Momsen (2008)use the terms “resilience” and “social capital” interchangeable when looking at the socialconstructions of small island states, but conclude that social cohesion and cultural traditionsplace small island states in a position to capitalize on certain forms of tourism development.Hamzah and Hampton (2013) assess the exogenous factors threatening equilibrium in small-scale tourism development in Malaysia and show that community resiliency has led tononlinear change, rather than conventional resort development, and a community led effort toreduce mass tourism policies at the national and regional levels.It is important to note that the tourism literature has provided a number of examples onnatural resource resilience (Lambert, Hunter, Pierce, & MacLeoda, 2010; Turton, 2005) orindustry resilience (Coghlan & Prideaux, 2009; Henderson & Smith, 2009), but communityresilience as a theoretical concept is still in its infancy in tourism. Therefore, this paperaddresses community resilience through the development of the HandMade programme inrural North Carolina as a means to examine a theoretical framework that encourages andsupports tourism as an economic diversification strategy for communities copingwith change.Exploring Magis’ eight dimensions of resilience, this paper argues that community resilienceaidedWesternNorthCarolina in its recovery efforts after a particularly harsh hurricane season.Research sitesThe Appalachian Region of the USA has a history of underdevelopment and hasfrequently been classified as a “region apart”, plagued with “profound economic and socialproblems” (Appalachian Regional Commission, 2010, p. 1), with one in three residentsliving in poverty. The mid-1990s showed Western North Carolina facing seriousdemographic and economic changes in their local communities. The tobacco industry, onwhich many residents relied, has seen extensive competition from newly emergingmarkets (China, India, and Brazil). This lack of economic opportunity resulted in amigration shift, with natives moving out, non-natives moving in, increased landdevelopment, traditional industrial decline, and job losses. Therefore, new sectors wereinvestigated as a means to bring growth to the shrinking economy.HandMade in AmericaHandMade in America was started as a regionally focused non-profit organizationcommitted to celebrating the craft industry and the craft heritage of the region. In 1995,HandMade released its first guidebook “The Craft Heritage Trails of Western NorthCarolina”. This publication was designed to inspire tourists to the rural mountaincommunities to experience the traditional crafts, the rich heritage and the unique sense ofplace found in rural North Carolina. Through a series of community meetings involving thearts community, educators, economic development agencies and businesses, farmers,elected officials, faith-based, and other community leaders, the feasibility of a regionalhomegrown craft-based initiative was designed to increase revenue to artists and thecommunity (Kline, Brown-Bochicchio, & Beedle, 2012). An online craft registry wouldeventually be developed to match craft artists with would-be buyers, but the mainstay ofpurchases would come from tourists visiting the Appalachian Mountains of North Carolina,HandMade’s region. To support craft and craft heritage conservation, HandMade provided anumber of programmes related to business and entrepreneurship education, community andeconomic development, and marketing of craft experiences. Their mission is “to groweconomies through craft and creative placemaking” (HandMade in America, n.d.). It isestimated that the craft industry provided an economic impact of $206 million in 2007 (a69% increase over the impact noted in 1995 when HandMade started).Since its inception, HandMade in America has grown to incorporate the additionaldevelopment of business skills “boot camps”, partnerships with schools to integrate craftinto K-12 curricula, entrepreneur support networks, residential showplaces for craft,landfill methane recapture to power kilns and furnaces, a regional series of barn quilts andthe small towns revitalization and community development project (Kline et al., 2012).A mainstay of the Small Towns Program is the strategy of “selecting a small, visible, anduncontroversial project as a first community endeavor” and then focusing volunteer effortson these projects (Kline et al., 2012). A key aspect of their community developmentprogramme is the revitalization of each community’s built environment. In particular, TheBakersville’s Creek Walk, Crossnore’s stone curbs (and landscaping), and Chimney’sRock’s river access found funding through assistance from the Small Towns Program.Natural disasterThe 2004 hurricane season went down in history as one of the most damaging naturaldisaster periods in the USA. Two major hurricanes hit the South Atlantic coast of the USAduring the late summer of 2004. Hurricane Francis, the first of these storms, raisedmayhem in the Appalachian region of North Carolina, causing severe flooding, structuraldamage and killing 49 people. It was estimated that over 23 inches of rain fell resulting in$55 million in crop damages just in Western North Carolina. President Bush declared astate of emergency in 34 North Carolina counties, allotting $6.5 million in disaster aid.Ten days later, Hurricane Ivan brought rivers well above their flood plains, causingextensive tornados and numerous mud slides to the region. The General Assembly for theState of North Carolina (2005, p. 1) concluded “that Hurricanes Frances and Ivan wroughthavoc upon Western North Carolina impacting the region on a scale not experiencedbefore in that area of the State”.The research sitesManyof the affected communities had already been involved in theHandMade’s Small TownProgram. The strategic planning inherent to the programme helped revitalize thesecommunities after the 2004 natural disasters. For this study, three communities were chosen,Bakersville (Mitchell County), Chimney Rock (Rutherford County), and Crossnore (AveryCounty) to assess the effect that participation in HandMade had on recovery efforts.Prior to the 2004 hurricane season, Bakersville had already begun a detailed planningprocess geared towards revitalizing the downtown area. With the help of HandMade inAmerica, a planning document known as the “Bakersville Cookbook” became thefoundation for future renovation including the Creek Walk, the re-use of abandonedbuildings for art displays and the renovation of the historic downtown courthouse.Following the flood of 2004, Crossnore received $90,000 in assistance from theFederal Emergency Management Agency and from the State of North Carolina. Usingconnections with HandMade in America, several restoration projects were initiated withthis funding, including improvements to the town fountain, bridge, addition of stone curbsand improved drainage, and the refurbishment of the Crossnore Meeting House.In the mid-1990s, there were several engaged community groups in Chimney Rockworking to improve the quality of life for residents and the economic opportunities forbusinesses. The partnership between HandMade in America and what would become theChimney Rock Community Development Association resulted in a number of significantimpacts to the town. The eventual development of the river walk, a river park, and a riverclean-up effort has provided increased river access for residents and added significantly tothe town’s tourism product.MethodologyThe project involved a qualitative process that documented the ripple effects of impacts fromHandMade’s programmes and Small Town Community development programmes andcategorized the impacts into a resilience framework. The data collection was conducted inthree phases: 12 in-person interviews with HandMade staff to develop a sense of theorganization’s beginnings and growth; a review of HandMade news archives, publications,cookbooks, and reports to assess the operational philosophy of the organization; and 3 focusgroups, 10 individual interviews, and 3 paired interviews conducted in Bakersville, Crossnore,and Chimney Rock (38 participants total). The data collection process was conducted in 2010and the data were coded using content analysis and the Smart Draw Program.ResultsFive themes were derived from the data to include: visioning, planning, and charrettes;Clean, Green, and Screen; grant assistance cycles; cluster meetings; and festivals andspecial events. Each of these topics will be introduced separately.Visioning, planning, and charrettesOne key element of HandMade’s approach was that anyone in the community was allowedto participate and have input in the initiative. This support prompted the local communitydevelopment volunteers to form an organization and apply for 501c3 non-profit status,which then made the towns eligible to receive grants. HandMade assisted with thedevelopment plans, designs and “cookbooks” for long-term strategies that provided aprocess for focusing and organizing future community and economic developmentactivities. HandMade generated publicity about the programmes, which inspired additionalbuy-in from residents and raised awareness within the community about the rich local assetsat hand – assets that could be enhanced to appeal to tourists. The result was the instillation ofhope, confidence, energy, and a sense that someone cared. The residents of Bakersville,Chimney Rock, and Crossnore credit the process of visioning the community’s future,planning for downtown revitalization, providing input into a charrettes process and thecommunity approach adopted by HandMade for the programme’s longevity and success.Clean, Green, and ScreenA premise of the Small Towns Program is the strategy of selecting a small, visible, anduncontroversial project as a first community endeavour. The term “Clean, Green andScreen” was applied to these projects to reflect the types of activities that are easy to doand result in a noticeable aesthetic outcome. These projects instilled confidence, promptedthe motivation for additional projects and encouraged others to get excited aboutcommunity development initiatives. The result was the bonding of community membersand organizations which expanded the volunteer base. New infrastructure brought newuses and new community events, which in turned spurred tourism, expanded localbusinesses and attracted additional grant funding.Grant assistance cyclesHandMade provided five essential elements to support the grant acquisition process:technical assistance on writing proposals, guidance on appropriate funders for projects,letters of support, a feeling of confidence in the abilities and ideas of the community and anetwork of associations, including HandMade, with which to partner. With the completionof a project, patterns became apparent, such as increased community bonding, communityand individual pride, and confidence, and tangible community enhancements, which inturn stimulated a new sense of empowerment and an eagerness for the next project cycle.Some of the grants related to the built infrastructure of the downtown, while othersresulted in financial assistance for tourism marketing.Cluster meetingsThe informants in the study praised the concept of cluster meetings, an annual gathering ofthe participating small towns. During these meetings, projects were presented, challengesdiscussed and advice distilled by other communities who had faced similar situations.Respondents commended the process and noted reaping spiritual, psychological, social,and logistical benefits from the annual meeting. Through the sharing of knowledgebetween communities across the region, participants gained interest in other projects,learned to avoid common pitfalls, found new funding sources and expanded their networksthrough the camaraderie and peer-support that developed. Successes were felt as sharedaccomplishments, resulting in a regional spirit and an increased interest in neighbouringprojects and people. Because tourism is regional by nature, the increased camaraderieencouraged cross-marketing of the towns.Festivals and special eventsFestivals and special events were another theme that developed into extended topicaldiscussion in the focus groups and interviews. Participants felt that festivals were aphysical celebration of the sense of community that had resulted from their hard work.The festivals encouraged residents to meet new people, inspired communication andbelonging, and strengthened community identity. By bringing “outer” county residentsas well as tourists into the town, it provided the potential for new revenue streams intothe community and revitalized the town centres.DiscussionWestern North Carolina has a number of natural attractions that draw tourists to the area.However, capturing the tourism spending in the area, especially in many of the ruralareas and small towns, requires a strategic approach to tourism development and is vitalin the economic recovery after a natural disaster. This paper argues that the developmentof community resilience helped Bakersville, Chimney Rock, and Crossnore weather inthe 2004 hurricane season and resulted in an increase in tourist numbers and spendingaround the local area. In particular, the facilitation of natural, human, cultural, social,financial, built, and political capital by the HandMade programme allowed these threecommunities the opportunity to expand their tourism base which in turn spurredeconomic recovery.The Small Town Program simultaneously focuses on processes (Brown & Kulig,1997) and outcomes (Cutter et al., 2008). While keeping resident attention on a tangibleresult, such as the Clean, Green, and Screen Program or a community festival, theprinciples of partnering, inclusion and self-efficacy flourished. As noted by Matthews andSelman (2006), communities were better able to utilize their resources, talents, andstrengths to create “virtuous circles” and adopt strategies that complement their particularenvironments (Cutter et al., 2008). Residents leveraged their natural, social, human, andcultural capital to create adaptation strategies (Pfefferbaum, Reissman, Pfefferbaum,Klomp, & Gurwitch, 2007; Waller, 2001) that allowed them to adjust to disasters, andfocus on reconstruction to take advantage of their tourism sectors.Unlike Calgaro and Lloyd’s (2008) conclusion, these towns were able to increase thediversification of the tourism product and support small-scale, local business development,including but not exclusively in the area of local craft. The visioning, grants writing andrepetition of Clean, Green, and Screen Projects allowed the community members to growtheir capacity, both individually and collectively, over time and gave them access tofinancial capital (Sherrieb, Norris, & Galea, 2010) and resulted in a “positive trajectory offunctioning and adaptation after a disturbance” (Norris et al., 2008, p. 130). As Maroudaset al. (2004) discuss, the existence of social capital between the local businesses, artisans,community members and nongovernmental agencies provided an avenue for endogenousgrowth after a series of natural disasters. Through the assessment of the Small TownProgram, Table 2 readdresses Magis’ (2010) eight community resiliency dimensions asthey relate to these communities.Community and economic development programmes such as HandMade’s SmallTown Program are not always unanimously supported and are wrought with inherenttrials, often specific to the cultural context of the community. Divisions of ethnicity,income level, residential tenure and political position continue to be struggles in anycommunity, but are magnified in rural areas. The continued ability to reach out, welcomeand involve new members in a meaningful way in the planning and leadership of thepublic is a constant challenge in any community. Sometimes the danger of these effectivecommunity development efforts is that they become “well-oiled machines” to the point ofbecoming a closed system. True resiliency would be born from a continuous open system,in which decision-making processes and leadership roles are available to newcomers to thetown and newcomers to the process.In agreement with Shava et al. (2010), the widening of social ties to neighbouringcommunities has continued to increase community resiliency through the encouragementof traditional values and the infusion of new knowledge. As for the preparation of youth tohave developed work habits and a sense of civic involvement, some of this is happening;however, the towns’ residents are ageing, and there simply are not that many youth.A more applicable concern might be to what extent the younger generations moving intothe community are prepared to become involved in civic matters. This will be the greatestchallenge to these small rural towns.Conclusion and implicationsThis paper has discussed a new theoretical approach to understanding the sustainability ofcommunities by presenting the resiliency of three North Carolina towns in their responseto a series of devastating hurricanes. Through the HandMade in America programme,community resilience was instilled prior to the natural disasters and helped to support theeconomic and social recovery efforts in Bakersville, Chimney Rock, and Crossnore. Withtourists to the mountain region spending approximately 18%more in these areas comparedwith the rest of the state (NC Department of Commerce, 2011a, 2011b), it is argued thatcommunity revitalization projects had a direct impact on the accumulation of natural,human, cultural, social, financial, built, and political capital. Future research directionsshould include the development of instruments to appraise a community’s progress onthese metrics as a means to measure a community’s strengths and weaknesses in achievingresiliency. Furthermore, as the Small Town Program has grown, it would be interesting toassess whether other communities have had similar successes after traumatic events.As this study was particularly geared towards recovery after a natural disaster, the measureTable 2. The eight community resilience dimensions as applied to Western North Carolina.Dimensions Associated metricsUtilization of communityresources(1) Community leaders increased their networks and were betterable to utilize resources outside the community(2) The improvements in the built environment provided newavenues to develop cultural, social, and financial capitals intotourism products(3) Financial and political capital were increased through thegeneration of new tax revenue and enhanced tourism offeringsDevelopment of communityresources(1) Through access to new revenue ideas and grant writing skills,community members gained efficacy and learned new waysincorporating their assets into their tourism offerings(2) The facilitation of volunteerism gave people an active role inadapting to change and creating tourism productsEngagement of communityresources(1) The civic leaders in these communities generated novel ideas toaddress change and learned to recombine resources in creativeways(2) Community members learned to take action in the face ofchange rather than being victims of their natural environmentActive agents (1) The Sustainable Tourism Partnership communities havedeveloped a strong sense of self-reliance in addressing majorissues and changes affecting the community(2) Increased networking has built social capital throughout theregion, encouraging collaboration and cross-marketingCollective action (1) Community members are well networked and know how tolook outside the community to find resources to support itsendeavours(2) Increased confidence and knowledge exchange has encouragednew ideas along with access to funding sources to ensuresuccessful implementationStrategic action (1) Short-term and long-term planning documents are used to guidefuture tourism development initiativesEquity (1) Various groups of the community have access to and utilize thecommunity’s natural and cultural resources(2) Various groups are actively involved in the decision-makingprocessesImpact (1) Each of the towns demonstrated a positive development of theirresources over time(2) Increased leisure activities, such as festivals and improvedfacilities, provide concrete tourism development resultsof resilience after other stresses, such as the recent economic downturn, may producedifferent results.This study ascertained the presence of community resilience within three WesternNorth Carolina small towns and explored which processes encouraged communityresiliency. In particular, the use of charrettes and cluster meetings allowed new ideas topermeate the development process, avoiding what Atterton (2007) describes as “extra-local weak ties” (p. 240). The use of special events to celebrate Appalachian culture andart also brought the residents of the region together in new and expanded ways. Lastly, theinsight to keep project small and manageable and the support with grant funding ensuredthat each new initiative was built on the success of previous projects and embraced eachcommunity’s resources, talents, and strengths (Ahmed et al., 2004).These case studies have shown that community resilience is not only a strategy tofacilitate recovery after a traumatic event, but can be used as a preventative measure toensure that a physical trauma does not result in the melt down of an economic, social, andenvironmental system. While this paper recognizes that community resilience is complex,dynamic, and context dependent (Saxena et al., 2007), this paper shows how resiliency cancontribute positively towards sustainable tourism development in changing environments.It also provides a new perspective on the facilitation of community networks prior to atraumatic event and documents the application of community-based project enhancementwhich allowed these towns to rely on increases in tourism as part of their recoverystrategy. As Ahmed et al. (2004) have shown, resilience is not about controlling conditionsbut developing a community’s ability to respond to change. In agreement with Magis(2010), the communities in the HandMade Small Towns Program developed and engageda range of community resources to thrive in an environment characterized by change,uncertainty, unpredictability, and surprise.ReferencesAhmed, R., Seedat, M., Van Niekerk, A., & Bulbulia, S. (2004). Discerning community resilience indisadvantaged communities in the context of violence and injury prevention. South AfricanJournal of Psychology, 34, 386–408.Appalachian Regional Commission. (2010). Moving Appalachia forward: Appalachian regionalcommission strategic plan 2011–2016. Retrieved from http://www.arc.gov/images/newsroom/publications/sp/ARCStrategicPlan2011-2016.pdfAtterton, J. (2007). The strength of weak ties: Social networking by business owners in the highlandsand islands of Scotland. Sociologia Ruralis, 47, 228–245.Boss, P. (2001). Family stress management. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Brown, D., & Kulig, J. (1997). The concepts of resiliency: Theoretical lessons from communityresearch. Health and Canadian Society, 4, 29–52.Calgaro, E., & Lloyd, K. (2008). Sun, sea, sand and tsunami: Examining disaster vulnerability in thetourism community of Khao Lak, Thailand. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography, 29,288–306.Chaskin, R. J. (2008). Resilience, community, and resilient communities: Conditioning contexts andcollective action. Child Care in Practice, 14, 65–74.Church, A. (2004). Local and regional tourism policy and power. In A. Lew, C. M. Hall, & A. M.Williams (Eds.), A companion to tourism (pp. 555–568). Malden, MA: Blackwell.Coghlan, A., & Prideaux, B. (2009). A destination-based approach to comparing reef tourismdestinations: The case of Australia’s Great Barrier Reef and the Caribbean. In R. Dowling &C. Pforr (Eds.), Coastal tourism development (pp. 237–250). New York, NY: CognizantCommunication Corporation.Cottrell, L. D. (1976). The competent community. In B. H. Kaplan, R. N. Wilson, & A. H. Leighton(Eds.), Further explorations in social psychiatry. New York, NY: Basic Books.Cutter, S. L., Barnes, L., Berry, M., Burton, C., Evans, E., Tate, E., &Webb, J. (2008). A place-basedmodel for understanding community resilience to natural disasters. Global EnvironmentalChange, 18, 598–606.Elsass, P. (1992). Strategies for survival: The psychology of cultural resilience in ethnic minorities.New York: New York University Press.General Assembly of North Carolina. (2005). Session law 2005-1, Senate Bill 7. Retrieved fromhttp://www.ncleg.net/EnactedLegislation/SessionLaws/PDF/2005-2006/SL2005-1.pdfGoss, J., & Burch, D. (2001). From agricultural modernisation to agri-food globalisation: Thewaning of national development in Thailand. Third World Quarterly, 22, 969–986.Gunderson, L. H. (2000). Ecological resilience: In theory and application. Annual Review of Ecologyand Systematics, 31, 425–439.HandMade in America. (n.d.). About us. Retrieved from http://www.handmadeinamerica.org/about.htmlHanzah, A., & Hampton, M. (2013). Resilience and non-linear change in island tourism. TourismGeographies, 15, 43–67.Henderson, J., & Smith, R. A. (2009). Informal tourism commerce at beach resorts: A comparison ofCha-Am and Laguna Phuket in Thailand. Tourism Recreation Research, 34, 13–22.Kelly, E. C., & Bliss, J. (2009). Healthy forests, healthy communities: An emerging paradigm fornatural resource-dependent communities? Society and Natural Resources, 22, 519–537.Kline, C., Brown-Bochicchio, C., & Beedle, J. (2012). A report on the impacts of the Bakersvilleimprovement group and HandMade in America. Greenville, NC: Recreation and LeisureStudies/Center for Sustainable Tourism, East Carolina University.Lambert, E., Hunter, C. J., Pierce, G. J., &MacLeod, C. (2010). Sustainable whale-watching tourismand climate change: Towards a framework of resilience. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 18,409–427.Landau, J. (2007). Enhancing resilience: Families and communities as agents for change. FamilyProcess, 46, 351–365.Lyson, T. (2004). Civic agriculture: Reconnecting farm, food and community. Medford, MA: TuftsUniversity Press.Magis, K. (2010). Community resilience: An indicator of social sustainability. Society and NaturalResources, 23, 401–416.Maroudas, L., Kyriakaki, A., & Gouvis, D. (2004). A community approach to mountain adventuretourism development. Anatolia: An International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Research,15, 5–18.Matthews, R., & Selman, P. (2006). Landscape as a focus for integrating human and environmentalprocesses. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 57, 199–212.Norris, F., Stevens, S., Pfefferbaum, B., Wyche, K., & Pfefferbaum, R. (2008). Communityresilience as a metaphor, theory, set of capacities, and strategy for disaster readiness. AmericanJournal of Community Psychology, 41, 127–150.North Carolina Department of Commerce. (2011a). Direct impact of visitor spend in North Carolina/county level statistics. Retrieved from http://www.nccommerce.com/tourism/research/economic-impact/teimNorth Carolina Department of Commerce. (2011b). 2011 North Carolina regional travel summary.Retrieved from http://www.nccommerce.com/Portals/8/Documents/Research/Visitation/2011%20North%20Carolina%20Regional%20Travel%20Summary.pdfPearce, D. (2001). Tourism. Asian Pacific Viewpoint, 42, 75–84.Pfefferbaum, B. J., Reissman, D. B., Pfefferbaum, R. L., Klomp, R. W., & Gurwitch, R. H. (2007).Building resilience to mass trauma events. In L. S. Doll, S. E. Bonzo, J. A. Mercy, & D. A. Sleet(Eds.), Handbook on injury and violence prevention (pp. 347–358). New York, NY: Springer.Piorr, H. P. (2003). Environmental policy, agri-environmental indicators and landscape indicators.Agriculture Ecosystems and Environment, 98, 17–33.Pretty, J. N. (2002). Agri-culture: Reconnecting people, land and nature. Sterling, VA: EarthscanPublications Limited.Rigg, J. (2006). Land, farming, livelihoods, and poverty: Rethinking the links in the rural South.World Development, 34, 180–202.Saxena, G., Clark, G., Oliver, T., & Ilbery, B. (2007). Conceptualizing integrated rural tourism.Tourism Geographies, 9, 347–370.Scheyvens, R., & Momsen, J. (2008). Tourism in small island states: From vulnerability to strengths.Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 16, 491–520.Shava, S., Krasny, M. E., Tidball, K. G., & Zazu, C. (2010). Agricultural knowledge in urban andresettled communities: Applications to social-ecological resilience and environmentaleducation. Environmental Education Research, 16, 575–589.Sherrieb, K., Norris, F. H., & Galea, S. (2010). Measuring capacities for community resilience.Social Indices Research, 99, 227–247.Sonn, C., & Fisher, A. (1998). Sense of community: Community resilient responses to oppressionand change. Journal of Community Psychology, 26, 457–472.Turton, S. M. (2005). Managing environmental impacts of recreation and tourism in rainforests at thewet tropics of Queensland World Heritage area. Geographical Research, 43, 140–151.Tyrrell, T., & Johnston, R. (2007). Tourism sustainability, resiliency and dynamics: Towards a morecomprehensive perspective. Tourism and Hospitality Research, 8, 14–24.Varghese, J., Krogman, N. T., Beckley, T. M., & Nadeau, S. (2006). Critical analysis of therelationship between local ownership and community resiliency. Rural Sociology, 71, 505–527.Waller, M. A. (2001). Resilience in ecosystemic context: Evolution of a concept. American Journalof Orthopsychiatry, 71, 290–297.Wilson, G. (2010). Multifunctional ‘quality’ and rural community resilience. Transactions of theInstitute of British Geographers, 35, 364–381.Zeng, B., Carter, R., & De Lacy, T. (2005). Short-term perturbations and tourism effects: The case ofSARS in China. Current Issues in Tourism, 8, 306–317.