Treatment of organic resources before soil incorporation in semi-arid regions improves resilience to El Niño, and increases crop production and economic returns

Environmental Research LettersLETTER • OPEN ACCESSTreatment of organic resources before soil incorporation in semi-aridregions improves resilience to El Niño, and increases crop productionand economic returnsTo cite this article: Jo Smith et al 2019 Environ. Res. Lett. 14 085004 View the article online for updates and enhancements.This content was downloaded from IP address 139.133.148.27 on 29/07/2019 at 13:09Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004 https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab2b1bLETTERTreatment of organic resources before soil incorporation in semi-aridregions improves resilience to El Niño, and increases cropproduction and economic returnsJo Smith1, Dali Nayak1, FabrizioAlbanito1, Bedru Balana2,11, Helaina Black3, ShiferawBoke4, AlisonBrand1,Anja Byg5,MengistuDinato6,MulugetaHabte4, PaulHallett1, Thomas LemmaArgaw6,WoldeMekuria7,AwdenegestMoges6, AlemayehuMuluneh6, PaulaNovo5,8,MikeRivington9, Tewodros Tefera6,MayVanni10,GetahunYakob4 andEuanPhimister101 School of Biological Science, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UnitedKingdom2 InternationalWaterManagement Institute, Accra, Ghana3 Ecological Sciences, JamesHutton Institute, Aberdeen,United Kingdom4 Department ofNatural Resources, SouthernAgricultural Research Institute, Hawassa, Ethiopia5 Social, Economic andGeographical ScienceGroup, JamesHutton Institute, Aberdeen,United Kingdom6 Environment, Gender&Development Studies, HawassaUniversity, Hawassa, Ethiopia7 InternationalWaterManagement Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia8 Land Economy, Environment& Society, Scotland’s Rural College (SRUC), Edinburgh, United Kingdom9 Information andComputational Sciences, JamesHutton Institute, Aberdeen, UnitedKingdom10 Business School, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UnitedKingdom11 Current address: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Abuja, Nigeria.E-mail: jo.smith@abdn.ac.ukKeywords: organic resource use, resilience, soil degradation, compost, bioslurry, biochar, ElNiñoSupplementarymaterial for this article is available onlineAbstractTheuseof limitedorganic resources tobuild resilience todrought in semi-arid regionswas investigatedusing systemsmodelling.The study focusedonHalaba inEthiopia, drawingonbiophysical and socio-economicdata obtained froma surveyof farmsbefore, during andafter the 2015/16ElNiño event.Using asimpliﬁedweatherdataset to removenoise fromweatherﬂuctuations, a tenyearlyElNiñowasdemonstrated to cause signiﬁcant long-termdegradationof soil, reducing cropyieldsby9%–14%and soilcarbonby0.5%–4.1%;more frequentdroughtswould increase this impact. Farmers inHalabausually applymanures to soils untreated.Counteracting the impactofElNiñoon soil degradation is possibleby increasingapplicationof untreatedmanure, butwould result in a small net cost due to loss of dung as fuel. Bycompostingmanure its recalcitrance increases, allowing soil degradation tobe counteractedwithout cost.Thebest option investigated, in termsofboth foodand fuel security, for householdswith access towater andﬁnancesneeded for anaerobicdigestion (500–2000US$), is tousemanure toproducebiogas and thenapplythenutrient-richbioslurry residue to the soil. Thiswill result in a signiﬁcantbeneﬁt of over 5000US$perdecade from increased cropproduction and saved fuel costs.However,manyhouseholds are limited inwater andﬁnances; in that situation, themuchcheaperpyrolysis cook-stove (50US$) canprovide similareconomicbeneﬁtswithout theneed forwater. Thebiochar residue frompyrolysis is highly recalcitrant, butpyrolysis results in loss ofnutrients, somay result in lower yields thanotheruses ofmanures.Thismaybecounteredbyusingbiochar to capturenutrients fromelsewhere in the farm, suchas fromanimal housingorcompostpits;morework is needed toquantify the impactof treatedbiocharoncropyields.1. IntroductionSmallholder farmers in low to middle income coun-tries are particularly vulnerable to extreme weatherconditions, because they are often living with a lowbaseline level of income and food security, and havelimited capacity to adopt strategies that adapt toclimate variability and change [1]. The warm phase ofOPEN ACCESSRECEIVED22 February 2019REVISED14 June 2019ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION19 June 2019PUBLISHED26 July 2019Original content from thisworkmay be used underthe terms of the CreativeCommonsAttribution 3.0licence.Any further distribution ofthis workmustmaintainattribution to theauthor(s) and the title ofthework, journal citationandDOI.© 2019TheAuthor(s). Published by IOPPublishing LtdEl Niño Southern Oscillation is associated with a bandof warm ocean water that develops in the central andeast-central Paciﬁc, and causes a shift in atmosphericand oceanic circulation, reducing rainfall in someareas while increasing it in others [2]. In June–September 2015, rainfall inmany parts of Ethiopia wassigniﬁcantly less than normal; precipitation dataindicated that this was one of the worst droughts inmore than 50 years with the drought being exacerbatedby the strong 2015 El Niño event [3]. It is estimatedthat 10.2 million people in Ethiopia were subject tofood insecurity during and immediately after theexceptional drought in 2015 [4]. Here, we use acombination of socioeconomic and biophysical mea-surements, taken before, during and after the El Niñoevent, to understand how the drought and subsequentﬂoods affected household resources in the Halabadistrict in the Ethiopian Rift Valley Lakes Basin. Weuse a novel systemsmodelling approach to use the datacollected to determine the potential to use organicresources to build resilience to drought, and attemptto draw out lessons from this analysis to help increasepreparedness of agricultural communities in Ethiopiaand other low to middle income countries for futureextremes inweather.2.Materials andmethods2.1. The study areaA detailed description of the study area, HalabaWoreda (district) near Hawassa, in the SouthernNations, Nationalities and Peoples Regional State ofEthiopia, is given in the supplementary materials(S1.1) available online at stacks.iop.org/ERL/14/085004/mmedia. It is classiﬁed as being semi-arid andexperienced an extreme drought during the mainrainy season of 2015, followed by delayed rains in early2016 and ﬂooding inMay 2016 [3]. Farmers in Halabawere not the worst affected by drought; during 2015the area was categorised as ‘stressed’, where other areasof Ethiopia were categorised as in a state of ‘crisis’ or‘emergency’ [4]. However, it is an agricultural areawith a high population density, where many farmersreceived food aid during 2015, and so there is potentialfor careful planning to help communities to ﬁnd theirown ways to cope with extreme weather. Changes toland management practices are likely to have a greaterimpact than in less densely populated but worseaffected areas, where measures are also less likely tosucceed due to the more extreme conditions faced.Therefore, this study area was selected as an examplelocation where improved practices could have a highimpact on the food security of both the local andwiderpopulation of Ethiopia.2.2. Choice of on-farmmeasures to be assessedFeedback from farmers in Halaba at focus groupdiscussions and stakeholder workshops suggested thatthey do not necessarily need newmethods to cope withextreme weather events, but instead want to knowwhich of the existing methods are most likely toimprove their resilience [5]. Therefore, the resiliencebuilding measures considered here are drawn from thecoping strategies already adopted by farmers to dealwith the droughts and ﬂoods experienced over recentyears (table 1). Here, we focus on the use of organicfertilisers and compare changes in resilience achieved tothe range of potential changes associated with soil andwater conservation measures. Diversiﬁcation of cropsand changes in management practices are beyond thescope of this paper. Further discussion of the resiliencebuildingmeasures used inHalaba is given in S1.2.2.3. Themodelling approach2.3.1. OverviewAmodel of the whole farm system was adopted, basedon the ‘Operational Research Assessment Tool forOrganic Resources’ (ORATOR) (S1.3). This simplebut comprehensive model is designed to account forthe impact of different uses of farm resources on soilorganic matter, crop production, animal production,water use, fuel availability, on- and off-farm labour,and farm income and expenditure (ﬁgure 1). Themodel uses process-based approaches to simulate theimpact of changes in resource management on resi-lience. Different inputs of organic resources to the soilaffect resource use in the whole system; increasedinputs of carbon to the soil lead to increases in the soilTable 1.Resilience buildingmeasures to be considered.Category PracticeUse of organic fertilisers - Increased use of untreatedmanures- Composting- Anaerobic digestion- PyrolysisSoil andwater conservationmeasures- Soil and stone bunds- Terracing, fences and drainagecanals- Stabilising soil andwater con-servation structures with treesand grasses- Strip cropping- Contour ploughing-Water pumps for irrigation- Ponds to storewaterDiversiﬁcation of crops andmanagement practices- Planting extramaize for animalfeeds- Early ploughing- Planting trees and grasses as for-age crops- Early sowing-Growing earlymaturing crops-Growing cropswith shortergrowing seasons- Area closure2Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004organic matter, which impacts the water holdingcapacity and nutrients available in the soil. This affectscrop production, which has an impact on the produc-tion of animals using feeds produced on-farm, or onthe household expenditure on feed to maintainanimals. The water holding capacity of the soil, andproduction of crops and animals all affect the require-ments for water. The biomass production of cropsdetermines the amount of crop residues available tofeed to animals, and the availability of crop residuesand dung for use as fuels. This impacts the labour orﬁnancial resources required to obtain additional fuels,such as wood or charcoal. The requirement for labouris also determined by water use, crop selection and theanimals maintained on the farm. This has an impacton the amount of labour available for off-farmactivities. The income and expenditure of the farm area function of the purchases made by the household,such as food, feed, fuel and fertilisers, and the labourand products available within the household for sale,such as grain,milk and animals.2.3.2. Impact of El Niño inHalabaThe ORATOR model was used to simulate the impactof El Niño on households in Halaba, using input datacollected from January 2014 to December 2016. Themean characteristics of soils in Halaba were obtainedfrom a survey of 196 soil samples collected fromrandomly selected farms across four different kebeles(districts) in Halaba [5, 6] (table 2). Comparison ofmean total soil carbon content in 0–20 cm topsoilfrom the surveyed samples with data from theHarmonised World Soil Database for the ﬁve majorsoil types in the area [7] shows close agreementbetween average soil carbon contents (36 and37 t ha−1, respectively), providing conﬁdence that thesurveyed soils are representative of the soils found inHalaba. The use of these data within the model tosimulate the impacts of the El Niño effect is describedinmore detail in S1.3.1 and S.1.3.2.2.3.3. Increased use of organic fertilisersThe potential impacts of increased application oforganic fertilisers, applied as untreated animalmanure(fresh waste), composts, bioslurry produced by anae-robic digestion or biochar produced by pyrolysis, werecalculated using the simulations of the impact of ElNiño in Halaba as the baseline. It was assumed thatfarmers could only apply up to the amount of manureavailable on their farms; the option to buy in orotherwise obtain organic wastes from neighbours orother sources was not considered. This equated to3.1 t yr−1 applied over the area of land holding(1.0±0.5 ha−1), giving an average potential applica-tion rate of 3.1 t ha−1 yr−1, but with 0.4 t yr−1currently being used for cooking fuel (S1.3.3). Thecarbon and nitrogen content and recalcitrance ofthe organic wastes were determined according to thetreatment method (S1.3.3). The impact on availableFigure 1.The structure of theORATORmodel.Table 2.Characteristics of soils inHalaba (depth 0–20 cm)measured in 196 soil samples collected from farms inHalaba[5, 6] and used as inputs to theORATORmodel.Parameter Mean Standard errorOrganic carbon, PC (%) 1.61 0.04Bulk density, Dbulk (g cm−3) 1.12 0.01Total carbona,Cmeas (t ha−1) 36.06 0.008Clay,Pclay (%) 12.8 0.3Sand, Psand (%) 39.7 0.7pH inwater, SpH,w 6.89 0.04pH inbCaCl2, SpH 6.15 0.04Note. Shaded values are calculated from the other parameters.Values are calculated as described ina Equation (1) of online supplementarymaterial.b Equation (12) of online supplementarymaterial.3Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004fuel, labour and household expenditure of applyingdifferently treated organic wastes to the soil wascalculated as detailed in S1.3.4.2.3.4. Installation of soil and water conservationstructuresSite speciﬁc simulation of the impact of soil and waterconservation structures on erosion requires detailedinformation on climate erosivity, soil erodibility,topography (slope length and steepness), and land useand management, which is not all available for thehouseholds surveyed in Halaba [8]. The potentialreduction in soil carbon loss was instead calculatedfrom the estimated soil losses by erosion, the observedreduction in erosion that can be achieved using soiland water conservation structures, and the carboncontent of the eroded soil. This was calculated asdescribed in S1.3.5, using carbon contents of soilsdrawn from table 2.3. Results and discussion3.1. The impact of ElNiño inHalaba3.1.1. Crop productionProduction compared to the previous decade for ﬁvemajor crops grown in Halaba shows a complexpicture, with variation in weather conditions betweenyears resulting in year-on-year differences in yieldsuperimposed on the impacts of El Niño; nevertheless,analysis of the results shows a signiﬁcant decadalreduction in crop production of 2.2%. If the noise inthe weather data is removed by running simulationsassuming 2014 represents steady state, so using 2014weather and yield data for the year before and after ElNiño, the impacts of El Niño can be separated outfrom the noise in weather and a clearer pictureemerges, with a decadal reduction in productionaveraging 12% (ﬁgure 2), and a reduction in revenueof 404US$ ha−1 (11%) formaize, 790 US$ ha−1 (13%)for teff, 387 US$ ha−1 (9%) for pepper, 572 US$ ha−1(14%) for sorghum, and 753 US$ ha−1 (13%) forwheat. This indicates that a signiﬁcant long-term(decadal) negative impact on production and revenuecan be attributed to El Niño for the ﬁve major cropsgrown in Halaba. If other years of weather data hadbeen used to represent the steady state, the decadalreduction in production would have been different;the results are presented here for 2014, as this is theyear that the soils were sampled and crop yields weremeasured, so provides the most realistic representa-tion of the state of the system.3.1.2. Factors contributing to loss of productionDepending on rooting depth and growing season,there are large differences in 2015 and 2016 comparedto 2014 in plant available nitrogen and water stress;differences in growing degree days are relatively small(ﬁgure 3).By disregarding each of these three factors in turn,it emerges that in 2015, the reduction in yield is attri-butable to water stress, whereas in 2016, nitrogen lim-itation plays a more important role (ﬁgure 4); themodel suggests this is due to nitrogen being lost byleaching during the period of heavy rainfall in 2016.Unfortunately, no local measurements exist to con-ﬁrm this result. The increase in the 2016 pepper yieldcan be attributed to the crop being planted earlier thanother crops, giving it access to the higher early-seasonrainfall (April–May). This is reﬂected in the positiveresponse of production to water stress in 2016 for pep-per (ﬁgure 4(b)). Note the model takes no account oflosses of yield that might occur due to the crop beingdamaged byﬂoods.3.1.3. Soil organicmatterThe reduction in crop production, results in reducedplant inputs to the soil (ﬁgure 5), causing a decline insoil organicmatter, as represented by the change in soilcarbon (ﬁgure 6). Again, when real weather data isused from 2005 to 2016, the picture is noisy; areduction in carbon that persists for more than aFigure 2. Simulated production of ﬁvemajor crops grown inHalabaDistrict compared to 2014. Crops growing on soils withmeansurveyed characteristics (table 2). Rainfall and air temperature used in steady state and post El Niño simulationswere obtained fromrecords for 2014. Actual weather datawere used for years when ElNiño effects were seen in 2015 and 2016.4Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004decade is apparent, although not all of this is attribu-table to the El Niño event. When the noise is removedby using 2014 weather data for the steady state and thepost El Niño run, a sharp decline is seen in soil carbonin both 2015 and 2016, which remains 0.2 t ha−1(pepper) to 1.5 t ha−1 (sorghum) below the 2014 soilcarbon content at the end of the decade. Although thisis a small percentage decline in soil carbon (0.5%–4.1%of the carboncontent in 2014), it represents a long-termdegradation of the soil resource. If left uncorrected byimproved management, this will result in a permanentdegradation of soil and reduced productivity of thefarm. Furthermore, if the frequency (or severity) offuture El Niño events increases, the soil carbon contentwill have less time to recover and the decadal declinewill be even greater (ﬁgure 7).3.2. Increased use of organic fertilisers3.2.1. Untreated animalmanureThe change in soil carbon per decade with increasingapplication of untreated animal manure is shown inﬁgure 8. This plot reﬂects two effects; the direct impactof adding carbon to the soil, and the indirect impact ofincreasing available nitrogen on the plant inputs to thesoil. Therefore, at lower rates of manure application,the slope is higher due to themanure replacing the lostnitrogen that is limiting crop yield; this is particularlyapparent in sorghum which remained limited inFigure 3. Factors contributing to simulated reduced crop production in 2015 and 2016 compared to 2014; (a)plant available nitrogen,calculated as the sumof nitrate and ammonium simulated in the soil during the growing season, (b) growing degree days, calculated asthe sumof air temperature greater than 5 °Cduring the growing season, and (c)water stress index, calculated as the average ratio ofactual to potential evapotranspiration during the growing season subtracted from 1 (so that a larger number indicatesmorewaterstress; nowater stress=0,maximumwater stress=1). If no bar is visible, the water stress was 0.5Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004nitrogen for longer than the other crops (ﬁgure 6). Tocounter the impacts of a 10 yearly El Niño event on soilcarbon in a typical soil in Halaba, between 0.2 and0.8 t ha−1 yr−1 additional organic manure would needto be applied, depending on crop type. This isapproximately equivalent to the amount of manurecurrently used for cooking fuel (0.4 t yr−1 spread over1.0 (±0.5) ha=0.3–0.8 t ha−1 yr−1).Using the dung that is currently required for cook-ing in a typical farm household to apply to soils repre-sents a loss of 0.4 t yr−1 cooking fuel with a caloriﬁcvalue of 5165MJ yr−1. Using the ratio of cookingenergy provided by dung and fuelwood (0.66—seeS1.3.4), this is equivalent to 0.3 t yr−1 fuelwood. Onaverage, collecting this amount of fuelwood in Halabawould require an additional 0.5 (±0.3) hours ofhousehold labour every week. If the farmer insteadneeds to buy additional fuelwood, this would cost 19(±2) US$ yr−1. In households that are already apply-ing any dung not used for cooking to the soil, thechange in revenue over the decade from crop produc-tion due to applying this amount of additional manureFigure 4.Contribution of different factors to change in crop production compared to 2014; (a) 2015; (b) 2016.Figure 5.Plant input of carbon to soil compared to 2014 for ﬁvemajor crops grown in typical soils inHalaba.6Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004is small, ranging from 16US$ (maize) to 150 US$ (sor-ghum). Therefore, in the ﬁrst decade, the overall eco-nomic impact of applying manures to avoid the soildegradation associated with a 10 yearly El Niño eventis a small cost, ranging from 40 US$ per decade (sor-ghum) to 174 US$ per decade (maize) (accounting forboth increased revenue from crops and costs of repla-cing cooking fuel). The longer-term impacts on soilsFigure 6. Impact of ElNiño on soil carbon formajor crops grown on typical soils inHalaba: for simulations using real weather data2005–2016, (a) total carbon, (b) change compared to 2014; for simulations using 2014weather data for steady state and post ElNiñorun, (c) total carbon, (d) change in carbon compared to 2014.7Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004and crop production, and the potential increasedimpact of more frequent droughts are given in S2.1.1and S2.1.2.3.2.2. Composted animal wastes and crop residuesA wider range of organic waste sources can be appliedto soils ifﬁrst composted, but to provide a conservativeestimate, it was assumed here that the maximumamount ofmaterial available for composting is equiva-lent to the manure available on the farm. Compostingorganic wastes increases the recalcitrance of organicmatter and increases the availability of nitrogen to thecrops, but also results in a loss of carbon during thetreatment process (S1.3.3). Despite this, less organicwaste is used to produce the compost needed tocounteract the losses in soil carbon due to the El Niňoevent than if untreated animal manure is applieddirectly; for a 10 yearly El Niňo event, compost derivedfrom an average of 0.5 t ha−1 yr−1 organic waste wouldneed to be applied, compared to 0.6 t ha−1 yr−1 if theorganic waste was applied untreated. Applying all themanure available on the farm as compost wouldsequester 2.3–4.1 t ha−1 of carbon per decade,compared to only 1.7–3.6 t ha−1 when applieduntreated (ﬁgure 9). Furthermore, the improvedavailability of nutrients in the compost results in anincrease in income, from an average cost across allcrops of 124 US$ per decade using fresh waste to asmall beneﬁt of 67 US$ per decade using compost(accounting for both increased revenue from cropsand costs of replacing cooking fuel). Therefore, bycomposting organic wastes instead of applying themfresh, the potential soil degradation due to a 10 yearlyEl Niño event can be countered without a cost to thehousehold.3.2.3. Bioslurry from anaerobic digestionHousehold anaerobic digestion is usually limited tocattle or pig manure, although food wastes can also beused to feed digesters. The digestion process emitsmethane, which can be burnt as a cooking fuel, buttherefore also reduces the carbon retained in theorganic fertiliser and returned to the soil (S1.3.3).However, because the recalcitrance of the organicmatter is increased by digestion, the carbon seques-tered in the soil is similar to that when the organicFigure 7. Impact of the frequency of ElNiño events on loss of soil carbon over the decade. Simulations use 2014weather data forsteady state and post ElNiño run and artiﬁcially adjust the frequency of the ElNiño years (2015 and 2016).Figure 8.Change in soil carbon over the decadewith annual application of untreated animalmanure for ﬁvemajor crops grown inHalaba. Simulations assume 2014weather data for steady state and post El Niño run.8Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004waste is applieduntreated (ﬁgure 9). Because thedigesteris a closed vessel, nutrient losses during digestion aresmall [9], so the bioslurry delivers greater levels ofavailable nutrients to the crop than compost. This isreﬂected in a greater increase than for untreated wastesor composts in the decadal revenue from crop produc-tion. This gives a net beneﬁt of 148–1086 US$ ha−1compared to when no manure is applied, which is52–412 US$ ha−1 greater than untreated waste, and26–139 US$ ha−1 greater than compost. Note that theseestimated responses to bioslurry need to be conﬁrmedin controlled experiments in Ethiopia and Sub-SaharanAfrica.Added to this are the potential very importantbeneﬁts of producing biogas. Digesting 3.1 t organicwaste produces 99–124 m3 yr−1 biogas, providing12 000–15 000 MJ yr−1 cooking energy, and potentiallyreducing costs resulting fromhealth problems associatedwith the particulatematter emitted by burning fuelwoodor dung [10]. This is equivalent to 7.7–9.6 t yr−1 ﬁre-wood, with a value of 509–636 US$ yr−1, or requiring1.9–2.4 h of labour every day to collect. The surveyindicated that farmers collect or purchase between1 and 20 t ﬁrewood every year [5, 6], so this will make asigniﬁcant contribution to the household fuel require-ment. The combined increase in income comparedto application of untreated waste from crop produc-tion and savings on ﬁrewood purchases are high;5142–6772 US$ per decade. However, the feasibilityof achieving these considerable beneﬁts depends onaccess to a nearby source of water; assuming thevolume of water needed for anaerobic digestion is5 dm3 for every kg of manure [11], digestion of3.1 t yr−1 manure would require 15 500 dm3 yr−1,equivalent to two jerry cans of water (volume 40 dm3)per day. A typical family in Halaba takes 1.5 h to col-lect 20 dm3 water in a non-drought year [5], so it willtake 3 h to collect the additional water needed for thedigester every day. Therefore, accounting for thepotential reduction in woodfuel collection, a typicalhousehold in Halaba will require 0.6–1.1 h everyday to run the digester in addition to time requiredfor handling the manure. A further constraint isthe ability of the household to invest in the biogasdigester, which in Ethiopia, can cost between 500 and2000US$, depending on size and design [12].3.2.4. Biochar from pyrolysis of crop residuesSince most of the crop residues in Halaba are alreadyused for other purposes, such as animal feeds, theimpact of incorporating biochar produced only fromanimal manures will be considered here. Pyrolysiscook-stoves separate combustible gases (primarilyhydrogen, carbon monoxide and some carbon diox-ide) from biomass by gasiﬁcation, and then burn thesegases as the fuel, producing a hot ﬂame with a highthermal efﬁciency (38%–50%) and low emissions ofparticulates [13]. Burning carbon monoxide andcarbon dioxide results in a high loss of carbon duringpyrolysis (around 65%) (S1.3.3) [14]. There is somedebate over the recalcitrance of thematerial remaining[14], which introduces uncertainty in the rate ofsequestration in the soil. However, using best availableinformation [14], incorporating biochar into the soilsequesters at least similar quantities of carbon as theuntreated organicwaste (ﬁgure 9).The loss of nutrients during pyrolysis also tends tobe high, with most of the remaining nutrients tightlybound in structural sites [9]. As a result, the increase inproductivity compared to no application of manure ismodest, with a decadal increase in revenue of 42–206US$, and a loss of revenue compared to applyinguntreated waste (54–534 US$), compost (80–807 US$)or bioslurry (91–892US$). However, biochar containsa large number of ion exchange sites, so there is poten-tial to use it to deliver nutrients by treating it withurine or mixing with compost or bioslurry beforeapplication [15]. Furthermore, there is evidence thatFigure 9.Change in soil carbon following a decade of applicationwith differently treated organic wastes, accounting for losses duringtreatment and the different compositions of organic wastes following treatment. The line represents the average value and error barsrepresent the range of values under theﬁvemajor crops grown inHalaba (maize, teff, pepper, sorghum andwheat).9Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004especially low temperature biochars produced frommanures can reduce the rate of losses of nitrogen byammonia volatilisation from the soil, so crop yieldsmay be signiﬁcantly higher than predicted here [16].However, there is some debate in the scientiﬁc litera-ture [17], and so this is another area of uncertainty thatrequires further work in Sub-Saharan conditions.If the household converted from a traditional to apyrolysis cook-stove, with a thermal efﬁciency of38%–50% [13] compared to a traditional stove of only11% [18], a pyrolysis cook-stove would provide4.5–5.9 times more cooking energy than using the tra-ditional stove. If all the manure available on the farmwas used for cooking on a pyrolysis cook-stove beforeincorporation into the soil, this would provide extraenergy for the household equivalent to 8.9–11.8 t yr−1of fuelwood, with a value of 588–779 US$ yr−1, orrequiring 2.2–2.9 h of labour every day to collect. Thecombined increase in income compared to applyinguntreated organic waste from changes in crop produc-tion and savings on ﬁrewood purchases are compar-able to a biogas digester, 5346–7736 US$ per decade.Given that pyrolysis cook-stoves cost less than biogasdigesters (∼50US$ [12]), require lessmaintenance anddo not require a water supply, conversion to pyrolysiscook-stoves may be the more feasible option for bothmeeting energy demands and stopping soil degrada-tion in Halaba. Furthermore, the carbon added to thesoil in biochar is much more recalcitrant than the car-bon added either as untreated waste, compost or bio-slurry. Therefore, if soil amendment of organic wasteis stopped, the carbon content of the soil may remainat a higher level for longer following application ofbiochar than following application of untreated waste,compost or bioslurry (ﬁgure 10). However,more workis needed to understand the factors controlling aggre-gation of biochar into a highly degraded soil, wherelack of organic matter may allow biochar to be lost byerosion.3.3. Installation of soil andwater conservationstructuresGiven a range of soil erosion from20 to 100 t ha−1 yr−1and a reduction in erosion from 40% to 66% byimplementing soil water conservation structures, thepotential reduction in soil carbon losses in Halaba is0.62 (±0.5) t ha−1 yr−1, where the error term dependson the range of erosion rates that occur on sites withdifferent slopes, soil textures and land uses. Thepotential annual changes in soil carbon after using allorganic manure available on the farm are shown inﬁgure 11 for the different treatments in comparison tochanges achieved by implementing soil and waterconservation structures. On steep slopes where rates oferosion are high, the potential carbon savings greatlyexceed the potential carbon sequestration achieved byapplying organic waste. This suggests that soil andwater conservation structures should be installed onsteep slopes before applying organic wastes; not doingso will result in all the potential soil carbon gain beingwashed downhill.4. Conclusions4.1. The impacts of ElNiño on land degradation andlivelihoodsThe El Niño event during 2015 and 2016 had asigniﬁcant long-term impact on crop yields andlivelihoods in Halaba, Ethiopia. The largest reductionin crop yields occurred in 2015, owing to water stress,but, even without accounting for crops beingdestroyed by ﬂoods, in 2016 there was a signiﬁcant lossof production due to nutrients being washed out of thesoil by the heavy rainfall. This had a knock-on effect onsoil organic matter (expressed as soil carbon), due toreduced plant inputs. Soil organic matter will remainat a lower level even ten years after the drought. Thisindicates the potential for the El Niño event to causelong-term soil degradation. Repeated El Niño eventsFigure 10. Soil carbon during a decade of application of 2.7 t ha−1 yr−1 organic wastes that have been untreated, composted, digestedor pyrolysed before application, followed by a decadewhere applications are stopped. The line represents the average value and errorbars represent the range of values under theﬁvemajor crops grown inHalaba (maize, teff, pepper, sorghumandwheat).10Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004will lead to further soil degradation, with increaseddegradation associatedwithmore frequent droughts.4.2. Implications for reversing land degradation andimproving livelihoodsOn sloping sites at high risk of erosion, signiﬁcantlymore carbon can be retained in the soil by installingsoil and water conservation structures than can beprovided by the organic fertilisers available. Therefore,soil water conservation structures should be installedand maintained as a matter of priority on erodingslopes before attempting to improve productivity withorganic fertilisers. This is an important ﬁndingbecause, although programmes to encourage soil andwater conservation measures have been successfullyimplemented in different parts of Ethiopia over thelast ﬁve decades, efforts have focused on common andhighly degraded unfarmed land; implementation onfarmed land has not met expected targets [19]. There-fore, more effort is needed to install soil and waterconservation structures on farmed land and bring alarger area of the farm into productive use.Additional manure should be applied to non-eroding soils (or slopes with soil and water conserva-tion structures installed) to reduce degradation due toEl Niño events. Applying the dung currently used incooking could counter the impact of El Niño, withonly a small cost to the household due to loss of fuel. Ifmanure is composted, digested or pyrolysed beforeapplication to increase the recalcitrance of the carbonin the organic manure, soil degradation can be coun-tered without a net cost (table 3). The greater recalci-trance of composted, digested or pyrolysed manure iswell known [6]; the important ﬁnding for resourcelimited situations, where competing uses and numberof animals limit the amount of manure available, isthat if the same amount of manure is treated beforeapplication it will provide better soil improvementwith net beneﬁt to the household despite the losses incarbon and reduction in volume that occurs duringthe treatment process.Figure 11.Comparison of average annual changes in soil carbon occurring over 10 years following introduction of differentmanagement options. Application of all organic waste available on farm (assumed 3.1 t ha−1 yr−1) as freshwaste, compost, bioslurryor biochar compared to installation of soil water conservation structures. Error bars on organic waste treatments represents the rangeof results obtained forﬁvemajor crops grown inHalaba (maize, teff, pepper, sorghum,wheat). The error bar on soil andwaterconservation structure represents the range of potential savings depending on slope, texture and land use type. Simulations assumeconsistent weather conditions represented byweather data for 2014.Table 3. Summary of impacts on household resources of different organic fertiliserapplications needed to counter soil degradation due to ElNiño event.Freshwastea Compostb Bioslurryc BiochardAverage change across all crops inKSoil carbon (t ha−1 yr−1) 0.29 0.36 0.25 0.29Crop prod (%) 9 13 14 3Water demande (dm3 d−1) 0 0 43 0Energy (MJd−1) −14 0 330 394Labourf (h d−1) 0.5 0 0.8 −2.6Net revenue (US$ yr−1) −124 64 610 676a Allmanure available applied to soil as freshwaste.b Only 2.7 ha−1 yr−1 applied to soil as compost and 0.4 t yr−1 used as cooking fuel.c Allmanure available used to produce biogas and the bioslurry reside applied to the soil.d Allmanure available pyrolysed to provide energy and the biochar residue incorporated in thesoil.e Assumednowater used for irrigation as this is not common inHalaba.f Labour accounting for collection of fuelwood and water only (handling of organic manure isnot included).11Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004Composted manure has most potential to retaincarbon and nutrients in the soil (table 3). Applyingbioslurry provides a similar amount of nutrients to thecrop as compost, and so similarly improves incomeand reduces the impact of ElNiño on crop production.However, anaerobic digestion also provides biogas tothe household, which will increase decadal income byover 5000 $US, easily paying back the cost of the diges-ter within the decade. Therefore, if the household hasaccess to the ﬁnances and water needed to invest inand run a biogas digester, this is a better long-termoption than composting.Applying biochar sequesters similar amounts ofcarbon in the soil as applying bioslurry, but loses ahigher percentage of the nutrients during pyrolysis.Therefore, biochar is a less effective organic fertiliserthan either bioslurry or compost (table 3). However, ifall available animal dung was used as a fuel in a pyr-olysis cook-stove, the extra fuel available to the house-hold would have a value of well over 5000 $US perdecade. Furthermore, the carbon in biochar is morerecalcitrant than in bioslurry or compost, and so, asdemonstrated by the simulations where inputs oforganic fertilisers were stopped, applying biochar mayresult in more effective long-term improvement of thesoil. The biochar also provides ion exchange sites thatmay retain plant available nitrogen, so there is poten-tial to treat biochar with urine before application tothe soil tomake it amore effective nitrogen fertiliser. Ifthis can be used to reduce other point source losses ofnutrients within the livestockmanagement system, thenet impact on available nutrients could be positive.Given the relatively low cost of a pyrolysis cook-stove(∼50US$), this may be themost cost effective, low riskoption for many households, especially where thewater supply is limited. However, further work is nee-ded to test particulate emissions from dung-fuelledpyrolysis cook-stoves to ensure that this does not havea detrimental impact on indoor air quality, and to con-sider the suitability of the hot ﬂame produced by pyr-olysis for the traditional cooking practices used inEthiopia. Work is also needed to consider the sub-sequent use of biochar; if households decide to use thebiochar produced as an additional fuel, rather thanincorporating it into the soil, then carbon and nutrientreturns to the soil will be greatly reduced and soils willbe further degraded.This work has considered the total availability oforganic resources for reducing soil degradation; inpractice, farmers usually apply more manure to areasclose to the home where they grow more valuablecrops and have easy access, leaving the distant ﬁeldswith lower amendments and so more highly degradedsoils [20]. The greatly reduced volume of all treatedmanures, but especially biochar, may encourageincreased use of organic fertilisers in more distantﬁelds, so bringing a larger area of land back into agri-cultural production.4.3. RecommendationsThe key messages for policy makers, extension work-ers and farmers emerging from this work are asfollows:1. Soil water conservation measures should alwaysbe installed on erosion vulnerable slopes beforeapplying manures to avoid wasting this valuableresource;2. If extra household energy is not needed, a low-cost option for countering soil degradation is toapply organic wastes as composts instead of freshwastes;3. If extra household energy is needed, and thehousehold has access to the ﬁnances and waterneeded to invest in and run a biogas digester,applying organic waste as bioslurry will provide asigniﬁcant additional beneﬁt of saved expenditureon fuel or reduced labour for fuelwood collection;4. If extra household energy is needed, but the wateror ﬁnances needed for biogas are limiting, apply-ing organic waste as biochar is a good alternative,providing a signiﬁcant beneﬁt of saved expendi-ture on fuelwood. However, measures should betaken to retain nitrogen from the farming systemin the biochar so that it acts as an effective organicfertiliser.AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful for support from the DFID-NERC ElNiño programme in project NE P004830, ‘BuildingResilience in Ethiopia’s Awassa region to Drought(BREAD)’, the ESRC NEXUS programme in projectIEAS/POO2501/1, ‘Improving organic resource usein rural Ethiopia (IPORE)’, and the NERC ESPAprogramme in project NEK0104251 ‘Alternative car-bon investments in ecosystems for poverty alleviation(ALTER)’. We are also grateful to Anke Fischer (JamesHutton Institute) for her comments on the paper.References[1] Douxchamps S et al 2016 Linking agricultural adaptationstrategies, food security and vulnerability: evidence fromWestAfricaReg. Environ. Change 16 1305–17[2] TrenberthKE 1997The deﬁnition of ElNiñoBull. Am.Meteorol. Soc. 78 2771–7[3] FunkC,Harrison L, Shukla S, Hoell A, KorechaD,Magadzire T,HusakG andGaluG 2016Assessing thecontributions of local and east Paciﬁcwarming to the 2015droughts in Ethiopia and southernAfricaBull. Am.Meteorol.Soc. 97 S75–80[4] FAO2016Global Information and EarlyWarning System(http://fao.org/giews/countrybrief/country.jsp?code=ETH)[5] Phimister E 2018Organic ResourceUse in RuralHouseholds inEthiopia (Data Collection) (Colchester: UKData Archive)(https://doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-853076)[6] Smith J,Hallett P, NayakD, Boke S,HabteM, YakobG,RivingtonMandPhimister E 2019BiophysicalMeasurements12Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004FromEthiopia’s Awassa RegionDuring theDrought andSubsequent Floods of 2015–2016NERCEnvironmentalInformationDataCentre (https://doi.org/10.5285/024c5a61-5114-41a6-93b8-e3fb4d24622b)[7] HarmonizedWorld Soil Database 2018 (http://fao.org/soils-portal/soil-survey/soil-maps-and-databases/harmonized-world-soil-database-v12/en/)[8] RenardKG, Foster GR,Weesies GA and Porter J P 1991RUSLE revised universal soil loss equation J. SoilWaterConservation 46 30–3[9] Smith J, Abegaz A,Matthews RB, SubediM,Orskov ER,TumwesigeV and Smith P 2014What is the potential forbiogas digesters to improve soil fertility and crop production inSub-SaharanAfrica?Biomass Bioenergy 70 58–72[10] TumwesigeV,OkelloG, Semple S and Smith J 2017 Impact ofpartial fuel switch on household air pollutants in sub-SaharaAfricaEnviron. Pollut. 231 1021–9[11] Bansal V, Tumwesige V and Smith JU 2017Water for small-scale biogas digesters in sub-SaharanAfricaGlob. Change Biol.Bioenergy 9 339–57[12] Smith JU 2013The Potential of Small-Scale Biogas Digesters toImprove Livelihoods and Long Term Sustainability of EcosystemServices in Sub-Saharan Africa (http://r4d.dﬁd.gov.uk/Output/193337/Default.aspx)[13] KumarM,Kumar S andTyagi SK 2013Design, developmentand technological advancement in the biomass cookstoves: areviewRenew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 26 265–85[14] Smith J, Abegaz A,Matthews RB, SubediM,Orskov ER,TumwesigeV and Smith P 2014What is the potential forbiogas digesters to improve soil carbon sequestration in Sub-SaharanAfrica? Comparisonwith other uses of organicresiduesBiomass Bioenergy 70 73–86[15] Thangarajan R, BolanNS, KunhikrishnanA,WijesekaraH,XuY, TsangDCW, SongH,Okg Y S andHouD2018Thepotential value of biochar in themitigation of gaseous emissionof nitrogen Sci. Total Environ. 612 257–68[16] Mandal S, Donner E, Vasileiadis V, SkinnerW, Smith E andLombi E 2018The effect of biochar feedstock, pyrolysistemperature, and application rate on the reduction ofammonia volatilisation frombiochar-amended soil Sci. TotalEnviron. 627 942–50[17] GronwaldM,HelfrichM,DonA, FußR,Well R and FlessaH2018Application of hydrochar and pyrochar tomanure is noteffective formitigation of ammonia emissions from cattleslurry and poultrymanureBiol. Fertil. Soils 54 451–65[18] Singh P,GundimedaH and StuckiM2014 Environmentalfootprint of cooking fuels: a life cycle assessment of ten fuelsources used in Indian households Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 191036–48[19] EPA2012National Report of Ethiopia, theUnitedNationsConference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) FederalDemocratic Republic of Ethiopia, Addis Ababa (https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/973ethiopia.pdf )[20] Zingore S,MurwiraHK,Delve R J andGiller KE 2007Inﬂuence of nutrientmanagement strategies on variability ofsoil fertility, crop yields and nutrient balances on smallholderfarms in ZimbabweAgric. Ecosyst. Environ. 119 112–2613Environ. Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 085004