Understanding the response to Covid-19 - Exploring options for a resilient social and economic recovery in Scotland’s rural and island communities

Scotland's Rural College
Understanding the response to Covid-19 - Exploring options for a resilient social and
economic recovery in Scotland’s rural and island communities
Currie, Mags; McMorran, Rob; Hopkins, Jonathan; McKee, Annie J; Glass, Jayne; Wilson,
Ruth; Meador, JE; Noble, Christina; Craigie, MC; Piras, Simone; Bruce, Fiona; Williams, AW;
Pinker, Annabel; Jones, SJ; Maynard, CM; Atterton, J
Print publication: 24/03/2021
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication
Citation for pulished version (APA):
Currie, M., McMorran, R., Hopkins, J., McKee, A. J., Glass, J., Wilson, R., Meador, JE., Noble, C., Craigie, MC.,
Piras, S., Bruce, F., Williams, AW., Pinker, A., Jones, SJ., Maynard, CM., & Atterton, J. (2021). Understanding
the response to Covid-19 - Exploring options for a resilient social and economic recovery in Scotland’s rural and
island communities. https://sefari.scot/document/rural-and-island-communities-response-to-covid-19
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ?
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Download date: 24. Jun. 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Understanding the response to 
Covid-19: exploring options for a 
resilient social and economic 
recovery in Scotland’s rural and 
island communities 
Summary report 
 
Authors Margaret Currie1, Rob Mc Morran2, Jonathan Hopkins1, Annie McKee1, Jayne Glass2, 
Ruth Wilson1, Elliot Meador2, Christina Noble1, Marcus Craigie2, Simone Piras1, Fiona Bruce1, 
Abigail Williams2, Annabel Pinker1, Sarah Jones2, Carly Maynard2, Jane Atterton2. 
1 Social, Economic and Geographical Sciences Department, the James Hutton Institute, 
Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen. 
2 Rural Policy Centre, SRUC, Kings Buildings, Edinburgh. 
March 2021 
 
2 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The researchers would like to thank all the interview participants for sharing their time and 
experience and the Scottish Government’s Rural Stakeholder Group for their steer in the project’s 
design and outputs. 
 
This research was funded by the Scottish Government’s RESAS Strategic Research Programme 
2016 – 2022 by SEFARI researchers under the Communities and Wellbeing Work Package. 
The views expressed in this report are those of the researchers and do not necessarily represent 
those of the Scottish Government or Scottish Ministers.  
 
 
  
3 
 
Contents 
1 Highlights ................................................................................................................................... 4 
2 Executive Summary................................................................................................................... 5 
3 Methods ..................................................................................................................................... 6 
3.1 Phase One: Interviews with stakeholders ........................................................................... 7 
3.2 Phase Two: Quantitative spatial analysis ............................................................................ 8 
3.3 Phase Three: Interviews in case study communities ........................................................ 11 
4 Impacts of the pandemic on rural and island communities ...................................................... 13 
4.1 Rural vulnerabilities........................................................................................................... 14 
4.2 Economic impacts ............................................................................................................. 15 
4.3 Disruption to services and organisations .......................................................................... 15 
4.4 The importance of digital connectivity ............................................................................... 16 
4.5 The relevance of age in determining impacts ................................................................... 16 
4.6 The relevance of gender in determining impacts .............................................................. 17 
4.7 Summary .......................................................................................................................... 17 
5  Factors that supported resilience in rural and island communities ......................................... 18 
5.1 Overall findings ................................................................................................................. 18 
5.2 Primary Determinants of Resilience .................................................................................. 19 
5.2.1 Community cohesion and inbuilt resilience ................................................................ 19 
5.2.2 Strategic partnerships and responsive services delivery ............................................ 19 
5.2.3 The role and responsiveness of community anchor organisations ............................. 19 
5.2.4 Responsive local businesses and services ................................................................ 20 
5.2.5 Digital connectivity and up-scaling online systems ..................................................... 20 
6 The rural recovery: what resilient actions are required for rural and island communities to 
thrive in future? .............................................................................................................................. 22 
6.1 Overall findings ................................................................................................................. 22 
6.2 Building on new partnerships and supporting anchor organisations ................................. 23 
6.3 Capitalising and rewarding community spirit ..................................................................... 23 
6.4 Encouraging and supporting young people to move to rural and island communities ...... 24 
6.5 Retaining and enhancing digital connectivity opportunities ............................................... 24 
6.6 Supporting adaptable local businesses............................................................................. 25 
6.7 Strategic partnerships which deliver place-based solutions .............................................. 25 
6.8 Support for the economy and key rural industries ............................................................. 26 
6.9 Enhancing the knowledge base on local-regional vulnerabilities ...................................... 27 
6.10 Retaining a flexible, targeted and responsive approach to financial support .................... 27 
Appendix 1: Summary of the Phase Two work .............................................................................. 28 
 
4 
 
1 Highlights  
What were we trying to find out? 
This research considered the impacts of Covid-19 on rural and island communities, how 
resiliently communities have responded, and the most effective ways forward for recovery. 
What did we do?  
Our research approach involved: interviewing people in key rural sectors; carrying out a map-
based analysis of resilience to the impacts of Covid-19; and using the map to identify case study 
communities. Interviews were undertaken in these communities to understand local 
perspectives. 
What did we learn? 
Rural and island communities have been vulnerable to the impacts of Covid-19. Specific factors 
that have increased their vulnerability include: reliance on limited employment sectors; being 
located far from centralised services (e.g. hospitals); limited digital connectivity; and an ageing 
population.  
Communities with a more resilient response have some or all of the following features: a strong 
sense of community; community organisations and local businesses that are responsive to local 
needs; the existence of strategic partnerships between community organisations and the 
public/private sector; and good digital connectivity. 
What needs to change in the future? 
Covid-19 has brought rural vulnerabilities into sharp focus and these vulnerabilities are often 
connected. Strategic and joined-up partnerships between community, public and private sector 
organisations will remain important, as well as novel and flexible funding mechanisms to enable 
place-based and context-specific responses. 
What do we recommend? 
We recommend nine actions that would assist rural and island communities to thrive in the future: 
1. Building on existing/new partnerships and supporting community anchor organisations. 
2. Capitalising on and rewarding community spirit. 
3. Encouraging and supporting young people to move to rural and island communities. 
4. Retaining and enhancing digital connectivity opportunities. 
5. Supporting adaptable local businesses. 
6. Strategic partnerships which deliver place-based solutions. 
7. Continuing to support diversification of the rural economy. 
8. Enhancing the knowledge base about local-regional vulnerabilities. 
9. Retaining a flexible, targeted and responsive approach to financial support. 
5 
 
2 Executive Summary 
The Covid-19 pandemic has required many people to adapt their lifestyles and livelihoods to 
mitigate the spread and impact of the virus. This report summarises the findings of a research 
project conducted by the James Hutton Institute and SRUC on the impacts of, and responses to, 
the Covid-19 pandemic in rural and island areas of Scotland. 
A three-phased research approach incorporated qualitative (Phases One and Three) and 
quantitative (Phase Two) analysis and attempted to represent a variety of both sectoral and place-
based rural and island community interests during the first year of the pandemic. The research 
aimed to: firstly, understand the lived experiences of the pandemic in rural and island 
communities; secondly, identify the factors that support and promote resilience in Scottish rural 
and island communities; and thirdly, consider potential routes to a medium to long-term recovery 
process suggested by rural and island representatives across Scotland.  
• The impact of Covid-19 on rural communities has been place and person-dependent as 
well as defined by levels of digital connectivity. Impacts were felt to be more challenging in 
rural communities due to ageing populations, in-migration of retirees, availability of affordable 
housing, peripherality issues, limited economic diversification and there were criticisms about 
the response to the pandemic by local authorities.  
• In terms of enabling factors of resilience during the pandemic, five themes were found: 
community cohesion and in-built resilience; strategic partnerships and responsive service 
delivery; the role and responsiveness of community anchor organisations; responsive local 
businesses and services; and digital connectivity and upscaling online systems. Participants felt 
that rural communities have been vulnerable to Covid-19 for multiple and often inter-connected 
reasons: reliance on a few key industries; centralised service provision; limited digital 
connectivity; exposure to tourists; food supply issues; and ageing populations. However, 
stronger community bonds in many rural and island communities were felt to have increased 
their resilience due to effective community-based response strategies.  
• Predominant themes emerging from what participants felt a rural recovery should look like 
include: building on new partnerships and supporting community anchor organisations; 
capitalising and rewarding community spirit; encouraging young people to move to rural areas; 
retaining and enhancing digital connectivity opportunities; strategic partnerships which deliver 
place-based solutions; supporting adaptable local businesses; supporting diversification of the 
rural economy; enhancing the knowledge base on local-regional vulnerabilities; and retaining a 
flexible, targeted and responsive approach to financial support. 
 
6 
 
 
3 Methods 
Highlights 
This research considered what the impacts of Covid-19 have been on rural and island 
communities, how resiliently communities have responded to the pandemic and the most effective 
way forward for recovery in the medium and longer-term. 
 
Our research approach involved interviewing people in key rural sectors, carrying out a map-
based analysis of resilience to the impacts of Covid-19, and using the map to identify case study 
communities. Interviews were undertaken in these communities to understand local 
perspectives. 
The research aimed: 
• To understand the lived experiences of the pandemic in rural and island communities (including 
examples of community responses) 
• To identify factors that promote resilience in Scottish rural and island communities; and  
• To consider opinions of the routes to a medium to long-term recovery process from rural and 
island representatives across Scotland.  
7 
 
This responsive research was co-designed with the Scottish Government’s Rural Stakeholder Group 
and took place during the first year of the pandemic. The project consisted of three phases: Phases 
One and Three consisted of qualitative analysis, namely interviews with rural and island 
representatives from across Scotland, while Phase Two incorporated quantitative analysis. The 
views of a variety of both sectoral and place-based interests were included, with particular focus 
placed on understanding issues arising due to the Covid-19 pandemic and their short and long-term 
impacts. Building on that evidence, the project explored how policy responses could support both 
the current and long-term recovery, resilience and empowerment of rural and island communities.  
Phase One involved interviewing stakeholders representing diverse rural sectors (e.g. land, health, 
etc.) to understand the impact and response needed for different sectors representing rural and 
island communities both during the pandemic and in the longer-term. In Phase Two an index of local 
resilience was developed and, as a result, a map was produced to highlight areas in which resilience 
might be stronger or weaker during the pandemic. Finally, in Phase Three, four case study areas 
were identified using the map produced in Phase Two. The areas included two pairs of case studies 
in two contrasting local authority areas. Phase Three involved interviewing representatives from the 
case study areas to understand more effectively the impacts being felt in different rural localities.  
Research ethics approval was gained from the James Hutton Institute for Phase One of the 
research and SRUC for Phase Three of the research. The research was also given Social 
Research Approval by the Scottish Government.  
3.1 Phase One: Interviews with stakeholders 
In July and August 2020, SEFARI researchers from the James Hutton Institute and SRUC 
interviewed 26 key stakeholders who represented a breadth of different rural and island interests 
from a variety of sectors. The research included participants representing land, farming, crofting, 
economic development and enterprise, national parks, resilience, health, youth, local authorities, 
food and drink, tourism, housing, and broader rural and island community organisations.  
Interviews were conducted using video chat (e.g. Teams and Web-ex) or telephone, depending on 
each interviewee’s preference1. Interviews were recorded digitally (if consent was given) and 
transcribed, and notes were written up. Interviewees were sent the interview questions and 
information about the project in advance to allow them to gather wider perspectives from the 
communities that they represent, thus the interviewees should be viewed as representing a range 
of views as well as their own. 
 
1 Interviews did not take place in person in order to comply with social distancing guidelines during the pandemic. 
8 
 
3.2 Phase Two: Quantitative spatial analysis  
The quantitative analysis in Phase Two was undertaken to support the selection of paired case 
study locations in Phase Three, by identifying localities with evidence of very different sets of 
circumstances. The key output of this analysis was a small area-level index representing local-
level resilience to the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic. Resilience forms a novel and positive 
concept which complements existing analyses2 of community vulnerability to Covid-19. The index 
of local resilience to Covid-19 impacts was calculated from nine specific indicators, drawn from 
seven national datasets and dataset themes, and representing five out of the seven themes 
related to enabling factors of resilience to the impacts of Covid-19 identified from a previous 
review. The indicators include two estimates of the impact of Covid-19 on the local economy, local 
demographic characteristics, the availability of fast broadband, and the numbers of local places 
and facilities which are linked to social capital and the care of potential vulnerable people, 
providers of childcare and care for older people. For data zones with complete data, the index was 
calculated with a theoretical range of 10 – 30.  A full description of the approach can be found in 
Appendix 1. 
The mapped index values3  (see Figure 1) show clusters of high resilience (dark blue areas) 
around Edinburgh, Perth, Aberdeen and Inverness. However, high scores are also found in 
remoter rural areas, including parts of Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles, although there are 
more obvious visual concentrations of low scores in remoter parts of the Highlands, and in Argyll 
and southern Scotland. The highest Data Zone score (29 out of 30) (i.e. high local resilience to the 
impacts of Covid-19) was recorded just south of Edinburgh (Rural South Midlothian), while the 
lowest score (11) (i.e. low local resilience to the impacts of Covid-19) was found at Elie in Fife. 
There are relatively small differences in mean index scores across accessible, remote and very 
remote small towns and rural areas4: the highest average (20.3, n = 585) (i.e. highest local 
resilience to the impacts of Covid-19) was found in accessible small towns, and remote rural areas 
had the lowest average (18.7, n = 214) (i.e. lowest local resilience to the impacts of Covid-19). A 
subsequent analysis of the distribution of extreme index values by local authority5 points to 
geographical differences: in the Shetland Islands, c. 46% (12/26) of rural and small-town Data 
Zones are in the highest quartile (i.e. high local resilience to the impacts of Covid-19), and the 
 
2 British Red Cross Covid-19 Vulnerability Index (https://britishredcrosssociety.github.io/covid-19-vulnerability/); 
Scottish Public Health Observatory COVID-19 Community Vulnerability Analysis 
(https://scotland.shinyapps.io/scotpho-covid-vulnerability/).  
3 Mapping in this report was produced using Esri ArcGIS Desktop 10.7.1. 
4 Scottish Government Urban Rural Classification 2016 - Data Zone Lookup (link); Scottish Government Urban Rural 
Classifications 2016 - 8 Fold Description (link). Copyright Scottish Government, contains Ordnance Survey data © 
Crown copyright and database right. 
5 Data source for local authority values: Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation 2020v2 data zone lookup (link). © 
Crown Copyright. http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/.  
9 
 
respective figure is 40% or above in the non-urban parts of the City of Edinburgh and Aberdeen 
City. By contrast, around half of the Data Zones outside urban areas in each of South Ayrshire, 
Dumfries and Galloway, and Argyll and Bute are in the lowest quartile (i.e. these local authority 
areas do not have a high number of areas with high resilience to the impacts of Covid-19). 
The fine-grained index also offers potential to be combined with other social and economic 
datasets to produce new local-level evidence and understanding relevant to the recovery from 
Covid-19. For example, there is a weak negative correlation between resilience to Covid-19 
impacts (this index) and a Data Zone-level score of community vulnerability to Covid-19, as 
assessed by the Scottish Public Health Observatory using social, clinical and demographic 
information6 (rs = -0.204, n = 1,981, p < 0.001). This suggests that in rural areas and small towns, 
there is a weak overall tendency for community vulnerability to increase as resilience to Covid-19 
impacts decreases, but with very high ‘scatter’ around this general trend, implying a complex 
relationship between these community characteristics, and representing a potentially interesting 
avenue for further analysis. 
 
 
6 Data source: ScotPHO COVID-19 Community Vulnerability Analysis (Version3.0). 
https://www.scotpho.org.uk/media/1974/scotpho-covid-19-community-vulnerability-analysis_v3.xlsx (downloaded: 
October 2020). 
10 
 
 
Figure 1: Index of local resilience to Covid-19 impacts 
11 
 
3.3 Phase Three: Interviews in case study communities 
Based on the Phase Two spatial analysis of local resilience factors, two local authority areas (Fife 
and Western Isles) were selected due to their contrasting geographic, socio-economic and 
demographic characteristics. In these local authority areas, specific rural localities/communities 
were identified for use as paired case studies. Two pairs of contrasting case study areas were 
selected in the Western Isles (South Uist and the wider Stornoway area) and in Fife (Burntisland 
and Elie and Surrounds). The communities in each pair are examples of communities that exhibit 
characteristics which are indicative of lower or higher underlying resilience. The selection of pairs of 
communities from within the same local authority area allowed for a comparison based on localised 
and community-specific factors, set within an understanding of the regional context within which 
both communities sit. In total, 24 semi-structured interviews were conducted, with three to five 
interviews at local authority level in both the Western Isles and Fife (with council or other regional 
organisational representatives) to explore regional issues and responses, and three to five in each 
selected case study area (with community council representatives, community trusts, local 
businesses and local community groups). Figure 2 shows the case study selection. 
 
Specifically, the case studies sought to explore the role and relevance of enabling factors for rural 
community resilience in relation to how communities have experienced and responded to the 
pandemic and lockdown measures. This included assessing:  
i. socio-economic impacts;  
ii. how communities responded and the importance of resilience and underlying capacity;  
iii. opportunities for longer term rural recovery and support needs; and 
iv. whether impacts and responses varied between communities. 
 
12 
 
 
Figure 2: Selected case study areas in Fife and the Western Isles 
 
  
13 
 
4 Impacts of the pandemic on rural and island communities 
Highlights 
There are several vulnerabilities that were identified in rural and island communities, which have 
affected their ability to respond resiliently to Covid-19. These were: challenges relating to an 
ageing population; in-migration of retirees; peripherality issues and associated transport costs; 
limited economic diversification; and a perceived slowness of response by local authorities. 
Crucially, these vulnerabilities were dependent on specific place-based factors. 
  
More specific concerns relating to the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic included:  
• The most severe economic impacts were felt in key rural industries and disproportionately 
affected those on lower incomes.  
• Rural businesses are often small and many people are self-employed, which made 
accessing government financial support more difficult. 
• Services were disrupted, which had implications for peoples’ wellbeing. 
• Although there have been improvements in rural digitalisation and digital connectivity, 
digital exclusion continues to exist for some people and in some places. 
• Age and gender effects also exist, and women have been more adversely affected by the 
pandemic than men in rural and island communities. 
 
14 
 
4.1 Rural vulnerabilities 
The case studies identified that many issues facing local communities were ongoing and had 
been exacerbated by the pandemic, as opposed to being new issues resulting solely from the 
pandemic. The ongoing challenges are summarised below. These challenges constrained the 
ability of rural and island communities to act resiliently. Crucially, many of these challenges are 
interconnected, with one often exacerbating the others. 
• Challenges relating to demographic vulnerabilities and an ageing population were 
emphasised. This has resulted in an increased need for social care, coupled with a rapid 
community response to mitigate isolation effects during lockdowns. The lockdowns were also 
perceived to have increased deprivation, and hence inequalities, evidenced by increased 
demands on food banks and social care during and after lockdowns.  
• Concerns were raised about the in-migration of retirees adding to affordable housing 
pressures due to a perceived ‘urban exodus’ during and post-lockdowns. There was concern 
that this trend would worsen in the future, particularly in remote regions, with the result of 
reducing opportunities for younger people to access suitable housing.  
• Peripherality issues and associated transport costs continue to act as a constraint, 
specifically in relation to retaining access to supply chains and the potential dependency on 
more accessible areas and visitors for income and resources.  
• Limited economic diversification and specifically a reliance on tourism was recognised as 
having exacerbated wider economic impacts. A dependency on a relatively narrow range of 
economic sectors, accompanied by comparatively high levels of self-employment, were also 
identified as creating economic vulnerabilities. These factors were felt to limit existing and 
potential future employment opportunities. 
• Criticisms of the responses to the pandemic by local authorities were apparent in the 
case study areas and were related to the perceived slowness of the local authority response, 
ineffective communication and coordination between the local authority and communities 
and, in some cases, a perceived lack of effective leadership from the local authority, resulting 
in some community organisations feeling isolated and unsupported. 
 
Widespread concern was evident that the timescales for recovery were uncertain, linked to 
uncertainty around the scale of impacts when financial support measures are removed and potential 
ongoing risk-aversion. Furthermore, concerns about visitor pressures on local services and 
infrastructure and the potential for inbound viral transmission (in both the Western Isles and Fife 
case study regions) suggest the potential for future tourism-related conflicts. 
 
15 
 
The place-based effect of impacts was emphasised. Although the Phase Three work highlighted 
that impacts were often broadly consistent both within and between regions, variability existed in 
relation to access to services as well as some sectoral economic impacts and dependencies. For 
example, impacts were felt to be exacerbated in the Western Isles due to the high number of people 
operating small businesses (with limited financial reserves), high rates of self-employment and the 
loss of creative industries. There were several ways in which islands were viewed to be vulnerable, 
even though there were restrictions on people visiting, and levels of social cohesion and 
volunteering were felt to be higher than elsewhere. When Covid-19 was present on an island, access 
to Covid-19 testing was felt to be less accessible than elsewhere and there were concerns about 
people becoming seriously ill and needing to be flown to the mainland. Challenges also existed with 
maintaining supply chains for certain sectors (particularly fisheries and construction) which was a 
greater concern in the islands, reflecting the challenges of peripherality which are compounded by 
the effects of Brexit. Additionally, in some cases, sustained travel disruption had resulted in some 
people moving away from the islands to sustain their employment. 
4.2 Economic impacts  
The most severe economic impacts were specific to key vulnerable industries (including tourism, 
transport, fisheries and the creative industries), as well as having disproportionately affected those 
on lower incomes. The extent of the economic impacts in a place was dependent on the dominance 
of these vulnerable industries. These impacts have been exacerbated by wider factors such as 
Brexit (e.g. impacts on fisheries, supply chain delays, etc.) and parallel impacts (e.g. down-turn of 
the oil and gas industry). It is also worth noting that many businesses in rural areas are small and 
many people living in rural and island communities are self-employed and access to financial support 
for these groups was felt to be less available and straightforward than for larger businesses. As a 
result, many smaller businesses ‘fell through the gaps’ in support. Furthermore, interviewees 
highlighted that sectoral economic impacts have knock-on, community-wide effects on households 
in small, remote communities. Policy responses to the pandemic were not always felt to be suitable 
for small businesses, the self-employed and those people with multiple jobs. Additionally, while the 
tiering system allowed the islands to be in lower tiers than the rest of the country, this did not result 
in economic bounce-back due to the continued lack of visitors from the mainland.  
4.3 Disruption to services and organisations 
In all rural and island areas, all organisations were disrupted - in particular the NHS - but also 
statutory and community/voluntary services, which are heavily relied on in rural communities. 
Disruption to transport services had been widespread, exacerbated by underlying issues with high 
public transport costs (e.g. in Fife), which was felt to have increased the economic impacts and 
isolation effects for those on lower incomes during the lockdowns. The loss of community services, 
16 
 
community hubs and face-to-face engagement (and related connectivity) was widely felt and present 
in all case study communities, with knock-on impacts in terms of isolation and well-being effects, 
with less access to mental health services than before the Covid-19 circumstances. Although the 
pandemic showed the potential for digital healthcare opportunities and this was quickly normalised, 
this was not felt to replace face-to-face visits which were viewed for many as being important for 
good mental health. Home schooling has also resulted in stress and anxiety for many households. 
The case studies appear to show that geographic peripherality is not the over-riding factor in relation 
to isolation and loneliness effects, although there were concerns in South Uist relating to 
vulnerability and a sense of being cut off.  
4.4 The importance of digital connectivity 
The pandemic has highlighted the importance of digital connectivity. Pre-existing digital connectivity 
has provided opportunities for rural businesses and service providers to be agile, responsive and 
innovative, with participants mentioning that moving activities online had provided greater business 
coverage. The normalisation of homeworking was felt to provide opportunities for repopulation in 
rural and island communities and also allowed some people to work who otherwise would not be 
able (e.g. mothers constrained by distances to travel and school hours). However, there has been 
evidence of rural and island people struggling due to digital exclusion, especially in relation to 
education, home working, online shopping, socialising and access to services. Poor digital 
connections also resulted in social isolation from friends and family. Canna was given as an example 
of one place suffering from a lack of digital connectivity. An example was given of Ardeonaig where 
funding was given to the community to improve broadband and thus support people to work from 
home. It also was felt that a lack of digital connectivity has exacerbated existing inequalities between 
urban and rural communities. 
4.5 The relevance of age in determining impacts  
Impacts and responses also varied between different population groups, particularly between 
different age groups, and to a lesser extent, between genders. While an individual’s age has led 
them to experience different impacts, the interviewees felt all age groups have been impacted in 
some way. Some of these impacts may be experienced more widely than in rural communities. 
Specifically, it was felt that: younger people have been affected by mental health issues, 
unemployment and anxiety over future prospects; middle-aged people have struggled with working 
or having financial worries, home schooling children and care for elderly relatives; and older people 
have faced greater social isolation than other age groups, especially for those with limited digital 
connectivity. It has proven difficult for older people (in particular) to develop digital skills under the 
restrictions in place; however, a positive impact is that the pandemic has potentially encouraged 
some older people to become more digitally connected.  
17 
 
4.6 The relevance of gender in determining impacts 
In terms of gender, rural women were considered to have been impacted by the pandemic in 
different ways to rural men due to the increased likelihood of them being responsible for childcare 
and home-schooling. This has led to women being more likely to resign from jobs due to childcare 
commitments. Female-dominated industries (e.g. hospitality, retail) have been disproportionately hit 
meaning that women are more likely to be made redundant. However, there was some optimism 
that a move towards homeworking could allow more choice for rural women to enter industries that 
were more receptive to home working with children present than has previously been the case. 
4.7 Summary  
This section has outlined:  
• Key rural vulnerabilities to the impacts of Covid-19. 
• Economic impacts - these varied according to how dependent areas were on a few key 
industries. They also reflected the particular dynamics of the rural economy – i.e. large 
numbers of small enterprises and self-employed people – which had knock on effects for 
acquiring support.  
• How the decline in service availability has had impacts on wellbeing and isolation. 
• The importance of digital connectivity. 
• Different effects of the pandemic on different age groups.  
• A disproportionate impact of the pandemic on rural women.  
 
  
18 
 
5  Factors that supported resilience in rural and island communities 
Highlights 
Five key factors were found to promote resilience in rural communities during the Covid-19 
pandemic:  
• communities that pull together to help each other out.  
• the presence of strategic partnerships and services that respond to changing needs and 
circumstances. 
• the presence of community anchor organisations making decisions suiting the needs of the 
communities they represent. 
• good digital connectivity and inclusivity.  
• services that are both reactive to the situation and proactive about finding new ways of 
delivery. 
 
5.1 Overall findings 
Five key factors influenced resilience in the sample: community cohesion, strategic partnerships 
and responsive service delivery, community anchor organisations7, digital connectivity, and 
responsive services. Overall, rapid, collective, agile and responsive action by voluntary and statutory 
 
7 We define these as long-standing and independent community-led organisations. 
19 
 
organisations was the cornerstone of the rural response to the pandemic, with the aim of such 
actions being to maintain services and community well-being and to support businesses. For 
example, in the Western Isles, the social isolation effects were felt, to some extent, to be countered 
by a rapid rise in volunteering levels and community cohesion. This was attributed to the existence 
of ‘cultural resilience’ among island residents, fostered through previous challenges and the 
geographic isolation of the region. In addition, the region’s low population density and peripherality 
reduced the potential for viral transmission, which (when combined with high compliance) resulted 
in very low case rates and comparative internal freedom (for the Western Isles) at various points 
during 2020.  These factors are considered in more depth in the following sections.  
5.2 Primary Determinants of Resilience 
5.2.1 Community cohesion and inbuilt resilience 
High levels of community cohesion were a major asset during the pandemic (and in other emergency 
situations8). This trait engendered a sense of community responsibility and belonging, which to some 
extent counteracted some of the potentially more severe impacts of lockdowns relating to Covid-19 
transmission (through compliance) and social isolation (through volunteer activity). This includes a 
wide range of community initiatives such as prescription deliveries, neighbour well-being checks, 
food deliveries for elderly residents and food banks, often taken forward by volunteer community 
bodies. 
5.2.2 Strategic partnerships and responsive services delivery 
A coordinated approach by organisations and the development of new strategic partnerships 
between community groups and other stakeholders was a key aspect of responding to challenges. 
There have been allowances to take people to the doctor/hospital in a safe way, which have included 
telehealth. A lot of these initiatives will continue now that the NHS has invested in the infrastructure. 
For some people this has made access to health professionals easier than before but only if they 
have good digital connectivity and literacy.  
5.2.3 The role and responsiveness of community anchor organisations  
Local community bodies, and well-resourced anchor organisations in particular (including 
development trusts), have played a critical role during the pandemic by forming genuinely place-
based solutions. Their roles included: coordinating volunteers; re-tasking staff to community support 
roles; providing support to other community groups; and utilising their networks to target available 
support to where it was most needed. Such community anchor organisations have been able to 
respond rapidly and with agility to adapt their function/role due to their inherent embeddedness in 
the community and their ability to focus on local needs and solutions (e.g. mobilising an existing 
 
8 See for example Currie et al., (2020) The long-term impacts of flooding: summary report available online at 
www.crew.ac.uk/sites/www.crew.ac.uk/files/sites/default/files/publication/CRW2016_02_Summary_Report_1.pdf  
20 
 
volunteer network, using assets and people rapidly to address gaps in relation to food delivery, 
medicines, checking isolated people, etc.). The value of strong resilience partnerships already in 
place was also highlighted by Phase One participants (e.g. in Dumfries and Galloway, from their 
experience of Foot and Mouth Disease, and in Aberdeenshire relating to flooding experiences). 
Community anchor organisations that have gone through emergency events in the past have 
retained that learning which has enabled them to mobilise during Covid-19 and to react appropriately 
to the needs of communities.  
5.2.4 Responsive local businesses and services 
The existence of local businesses and services (including post offices, shops and GPs) was a further 
factor in ensuring continued service availability during lockdowns, with community infrastructure 
widely recognised to have played a crucial role in the resilience of rural communities during the 
pandemic. Many smaller local businesses in the island communities were recognised as having 
demonstrated adaptive capacity, with many having benefitted from an emphasis on local shopping 
during the pandemic. Local businesses and services also demonstrated agility, for example by doing 
deliveries, making up orders for collection and introducing online ordering. The example of Sanday 
was given where the shop ordered extra supplies to ensure everyone got what they needed and 
also set up a DIY and gardening section in response to local demand. Another example was in Argyll 
and Bute, where the Council made an agreement with the Co-op to provide credit facilities to 
volunteers. This enabled volunteers to buy groceries for people who were shielding, lived more than 
five miles away or were avoiding public transport. A website was set up to allow small craft 
businesses across the Scottish islands to go online. 
5.2.5 Digital connectivity and up-scaling online systems 
One of the most defining responses to the pandemic has been the rapid shift to using digital solutions 
to work, socialise, obtain support and access services. Participants commented that it is now more 
important than ever for everyone to be digitally connected. In the case studies it was found that 
existing high-quality broadband networks in most of the case study areas facilitated this shift, with 
related issues of lack of access to a computer or tablet addressed in many cases through provision 
of these by the local authority, agencies or community organisations.  
 
Digital connectivity and previously tested systems (e.g. home working, E-Sgoil9 and online events) 
was found to be an important facilitator in adapting to the impact of the pandemic in rural and island 
communities. In several cases, the potential additional benefits of inclusivity (e.g. online counselling, 
attending meetings from a distance, etc.) were recognised and in some cases community hubs had 
 
9 Digital learning from Comhairle Nan Eilean Siar. 
21 
 
been set up online. Some participants felt that digital connectivity was ‘good enough’ whilst others 
were thinking more in terms of ‘good enough’ for rural communities (i.e. people in rural communities 
are likely to put up with a worse service than might be expected by their urban counterparts). 
Variable broadband is an issue, but it is not only an issue in rural areas. Connectivity that did exist 
was under huge pressure due to children using it for school, both parents home working and 
potentially more than one person using video conferencing/heavy demand functions from the home 
network. Good digital connectivity can therefore be seen as a factor promoting resilience, while poor 
digital connectivity can also act as a constraint to resilience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
22 
 
6 The rural recovery: what resilient actions are required for rural and 
island communities to thrive in future? 
Highlights 
This research highlights nine actions that would assist rural and island communities to thrive in 
the future. These include: 
1. Building on existing and new partnerships and supporting anchor organisations. 
2. Capitalising on and rewarding community spirit. 
3. Encouraging and supporting young people to move to rural and island communities. 
4. Retaining and enhancing digital connectivity opportunities. 
5. Supporting adaptable local businesses.  
6. Strategic partnerships which deliver place-based solutions. 
7. Continuing to support diversification of the rural economy. 
8. Enhancing the knowledge base about local-regional vulnerabilities. 
9. Retaining a flexible, targeted and responsive approach to financial support. 
 
6.1 Overall findings 
Interviewees collectively agreed that the full effects of the pandemic were yet to be felt, with financial 
pressures likely to increase during 2021. The findings of this work demonstrate the importance of 
fostering community resilience in relation to both emergency response planning and preparedness 
and strengthening underlying capacity across a range of areas (e.g. community anchor 
organisations, demographics, housing, etc.) to enhance ‘everyday’ resilience and community 
23 
 
capacity over the longer term10. This is particularly critical given the concerns evident in relation to 
the uncertainty around recovery timescales and wider recognition of the disproportionate impacts of 
the pandemic in rural regions11.  
 
Participants made recommendations that align closely with the Scottish Government’s focus on a 
rural recovery that is both ‘green’ and ‘digital’, and at the same time enhances peoples’ wellbeing. 
There was a broad desire to build a recovery around a more equal and equitable society that is 
enabled by the Scottish Government’s community empowerment agenda. Most participants were 
optimistic about the future of Scotland’s rural and island communities and viewed the pandemic as 
an opportunity or catalyst to effectively rebuild these communities. It was also felt that 
interconnections and new networks between policy, stakeholders and industry should be utilised 
and capitalised on in recovery planning by the Scottish Government, and lessons in agility should 
continue going ahead.  
6.2 Building on new partnerships and supporting anchor organisations 
Building on existing and new partnerships between the third, public and private sectors is critical to 
ensuring a coordinated approach to addressing longer-term challenges, including community 
development, tourism recovery and visitor management. The pandemic has highlighted that 
community anchor organisations have the capacity and ability to react and respond with agility to 
community issues in a way which allows for genuinely place-based collaborations to be instigated.  
Community anchor organisations are therefore key to ensuring communities are sufficiently 
empowered and effectively structured to coordinate community responses and engage with 
challenges in collaboration with other organisations. From a policy perspective, approaches which 
support shared service delivery models, joint (and novel) funding mechanisms, and the development 
of strategic partnerships to address systemic challenges (e.g. affordable housing), offer 
considerable future potential. In addition, enhancing local leadership (including from local 
authorities) and communication remains a key challenge for building effective coalitions for 
enhancing services.  
6.3 Capitalising and rewarding community spirit  
Maintaining and building on the widespread community responses during the pandemic represents 
an opportunity for community organisations and the public sector. Working at home and the furlough 
support scheme increased the free time of many community members, resulting in a widespread 
increase in volunteering. While this is likely to decline post-pandemic, continuing work at home 
 
10 For an in-depth exploration of key underlying factors affecting community resilience see a previous output from this 
research: https://sefari.scot/research/objectives/local-assets-local-decisions-and-community-resilience 
11 For example, see data summarised by the Fraser of Allander Institute on regional impacts of the pandemic here. 
24 
 
opportunities and the community spirit ‘footprint’ of the pandemic offers scope for re-energising 
community bodies and engaging with the community development agenda across Scottish 
communities. Opportunities exist from a policy perspective in relation to supporting flexible working 
patterns and job-sharing arrangements and the longer-term potential for assessing the impacts of a 
four-day week on health and wellbeing. Some participants felt that community anchor organisations 
countered the lack of adaptability observed from local authorities and if such organisations received 
core funding this would maximise their ability to continue this function, particularly if there were paid 
employees to perform some tasks currently undertaken by volunteers. 
6.4 Encouraging and supporting young people to move to rural and island communities 
Many interviewees saw potential for rural and island repopulation in the wake of the pandemic due 
to people placing greater emphasis on the importance of green space and being enabled to work 
from home. This was considered to present enormous opportunities for rural communities, 
particularly if accompanied by the dispersal of public sector jobs away from the Central Belt and into 
rural and sparsely populated areas. However, repopulation must be accompanied by strategic 
planning to ensure it is sustainable and to avoid exacerbating existing demographic imbalance. With 
any rural population increase, the following key issues must be considered: 
1. Creating a more diverse (green) rural economy that attracts young people of working age. 
2. Building sufficient capacity in the construction sector to increase affordable housing. 
3. Ensuring existing inequalities for people and places in rural communities are narrowed, 
not widened. 
4. Addressing the question of equitable access to land and driving more effective ways for 
communities to contribute to their longer-term sustainability.   
The continued (partial) adoption of the work at home model offers opportunities for repopulation, 
both in relation to attracting self-employed people to more remote parts of Scotland (where 
populations may be declining) and for further de-centralisation of the employment hubs of larger 
businesses and organisations. From a policy perspective, specific opportunities include 
decentralising (or partly decentralising) some agencies and government departments to sparsely 
populated areas and creating incentives (or strategic partnerships) to support businesses to 
establish hubs in remoter regions. 
6.5 Retaining and enhancing digital connectivity opportunities 
A rural recovery that includes a focus on digital connectivity was considered vital, not only to support 
existing rural and island populations and address deepening issues around digital exclusion, but 
also to facilitate rural repopulation across all age groups. Good digital connectivity was crucial to 
enable communities to be more resilient and economies to be more diverse in a longer-term 
25 
 
recovery process. Specifically, good digital connectivity was expected to lead to economic 
diversification by catalysing new and existing businesses, as well as enabling more home working.  
The pandemic has also rapidly resulted in a wide range of new and more widely available 
applications of digital tools in education, health, social care, entertainment and wider community 
activity. These offer scope to support a ‘levelling up’ in service delivery in more peripheral regions 
of Scotland, including in relation to delivery of the curriculum and a re-configuring of services 
delivery, with potential knock-on benefits in relation to reducing emissions. Critically, post-pandemic, 
this will require an emphasis on effective ‘blended’ approaches, particularly in relation to online 
working and health care and assessment of the potential benefits and impacts of different models 
of service delivery. 
6.6 Supporting adaptable local businesses  
Local shops have played a crucial role in the resilience of rural and island communities during the 
pandemic and participants felt strongly that there is a need to think about how local shops can retain 
this broader role and can be supported to remain agile and responsive in future. The value and 
adaptability of local businesses in increasing local ‘self-sufficiency’ has been effectively 
demonstrated throughout the pandemic. Building on this going forward requires a specific policy 
emphasis on supporting local procurement by larger organisations (e.g. local authorities and 
agencies) and a focus on supporting local, place-based, private and social enterprises which add 
value to local produce. Participants stated that policy decisions about all forms of service provision 
must consider differing rural and island circumstances, i.e. that the policy decisions must take into 
account place-based differences. It will also be imperative to understand the barriers to digital 
services, particularly those that are replacing traditional methods of service provision or access.  
The pandemic has highlighted the importance of local production and supply, especially in food and 
agriculture. It is important to retain and develop an emphasis on shopping locally and supporting 
local businesses which have been viewed as being adaptable to new circumstances. The local food 
agenda and local processing facilities such as abattoirs are currently very important for production, 
due to the effects of both the pandemic and Brexit.  
6.7 Strategic partnerships which deliver place-based solutions  
As evident from the Western Isles case study in particular (but also in relation to public transport 
provision in Fife) a number of infrastructural challenges (e.g. connectivity, housing) remain which 
potentially constrain the capacity of communities to be resilient during periods of change. These 
more systemic challenges are a key dimension of the relative resilience of a local community or 
region to both gradual (e.g. demographic decline) and rapid (unpredictable) impacts. In addition to 
ensuring sufficient connectivity of the island regions, affordable housing remains a growing 
26 
 
challenge in many peripheral regions (as demonstrated in the Western Isles case study). Addressing 
this challenge is recognised as requiring novel, place-specific approaches developed through 
strategic partnership approaches (e.g. between housing providers and asset-owning community 
anchor organisations). In combination with a de-centralisation and local-enterprise agenda, 
addressing affordable housing demand represents a critical opportunity for remote regions to ensure 
long term community retention as well as to support any repopulation of these communities. 
 
Participants suggested that there is a need for real structural change and revisions to the National 
Planning Framework. There was a clear desire to move away from centralised decision-making and 
for rural and island communities to be kept at the centre of the debate. For example, there was a 
call for a ‘Rural Bill’ similar to the Islands (Scotland) Act 2018 that supports rural policy, and that is 
place and person-focused. However, there is also a need to know who the community-focused 
organisations are and what rural and island communities can offer. There must be more local 
intelligence-gathering about local needs. Nuances across rural and island communities must be 
more carefully considered by future government policy. For this approach to be achieved it was felt 
that the Scottish Government needs to prioritise place-based policy making12 and reject centrally-
designed and one-size-fits-all policy approaches. Some participants felt that there should be more 
local authority distribution of the funds available since they have good knowledge of local needs. 
Other interviewees felt that Trusts (both community and development) were able to mobilise rapidly 
during the Covid-19 outbreak and are critical to future-proofed and resilient rural communities.  
6.8 Support for the economy and key rural industries 
There was a consensus amongst participants that support is required to ensure the survival of  
current key rural and island industries including the hospitality sector, oil and gas, fishing and 
agriculture. Participants noted that increased emphasis on holidays in the UK could offer 
opportunities for rural communities in the medium term; however, the future rural economy should 
place less reliance on tourism and more on sectors providing year-round stability.  
Participants felt that a green recovery should be integral to an economy based on wellbeing rather 
than consumption, and thus that recovery should be framed around empowerment, equity and a 
shift towards greater land ‘sharing’ models. Some suggestions to achieve a wellbeing-focused green 
recovery included incentives for businesses to enhance their environmental standards/reduce 
carbon emissions, a focus on digital innovation, and an emphasis on the employment of young 
people. Another suggestion was that the green recovery should include a discussion around flexible 
 
12 More information about parallel work being undertaken by the research team on place-based policy and rural 
Scotland can be found here: 3.4.2: Place-based policy and implications for policy and service delivery - Strategic 
Research Programme - SRUC 
27 
 
procurement, supply chains and local food production. Also noteworthy is that there are many small 
and micro rural enterprises that are vital to the wider rural economy requiring specialised support. 
6.9 Enhancing the knowledge base on local-regional vulnerabilities 
As evidenced from the case studies in both regions, knowledge gaps exist in relation to local-level 
understandings of care needs and specific vulnerabilities across communities. While embedded 
local organisations can coordinate measures to identify and respond to needs relatively rapidly, 
there remains a requirement for ensuring these vulnerabilities are understood before emergencies 
occur. This will ensure community-level responses can be effectively coordinated and targeted 
rapidly. Future research also offers scope for assessing the views of younger people across 
Scotland in relation to where they see themselves living and working in the future and the related 
opportunities and pressures for rural areas. 
6.10 Retaining a flexible, targeted and responsive approach to financial support 
Participants felt it was important to identify how best to support key rural sectors and communities. 
In the short-term and medium-term an economic hit is anticipated, but well-targeted funding now will 
mean that in the longer term there will be building blocks for stronger enterprises and assets that 
pay back that investment. Participants recommended that there should be flexibility for existing 
government grant deadlines for community funding (e.g. Rural and Island Housing Fund, Scottish 
Land Fund); and the establishment of a replacement for LEADER funding. Future funding needs to 
maintain levels of trust in community bodies to know what they want and need, and funding should 
be opportunity-focused. The Scottish Government was urged by participants to be less cautious 
about funding, to accept a higher level of risk, and to be more flexible in the application of ongoing 
funding mechanisms. Such an approach could allow the Scottish Government to “do the rhetoric” 
and enable community empowerment to be more fully achieved. Participants also suggested there 
should be sustainable funding for the voluntary sector, as well as support for social enterprises. 
Such an approach would be in keeping with the vision of a wellbeing economy. There was also a 
desire for more support to be available for organisations whilst they are applying for funding.   
A range of examples from the case studies demonstrated the importance and usefulness of a 
responsive and more targeted approach to providing support to enterprise and communities. In 
addition, measures (e.g. seed funding) which foster the development of social enterprise and new 
income streams offer particular relevance going forward given ongoing economic pressures. As 
highlighted by the island case studies, policy responses are also required which reflect the specificity 
of different regions (e.g. ‘island proofing’ through Island Communities Impact Assessments 
introduced as part of the Islands (Scotland) Act 2018) and their unique socio-economic 
characteristics (e.g. peripherality) and consider the impacts of wider national level policy (e.g. the 
tiering system) on island regions. 
28 
 
Appendix 1: Summary of the Phase Two work 
This work began with a discussion of potentially relevant datasets for indicators that were identified 
as part of the outputs in Phase One of the research. Themes and facilities raised in the Phase One 
interviews which are related to resilience were summarised. Discussions around potential sources 
of data stemming from the Phase One findings led to a compilation of a ‘long list’ of datasets 
(focusing on data available for Data Zones, other small areas, or spatial/location data) which 
identified possible links between these datasets and seven themes corresponding to enabling 
factors of resilience to the impacts of Covid-19: previous research for Scotland’s National Centre for 
Resilience13 had identified enabling factors of everyday resilience. The researchers then reviewed 
the list by theme and produced a final list of 50 datasets, which was then turned into a neat list of 
34 datasets and ‘dataset themes’ (after adding more ‘readable’ names and combining similar or 
duplicated datasets into single themes) and their links to the seven themes noted above. This was 
presented to the project team for feedback: so that any in gaps or points from the stakeholder 
interviews could be included (Phase One). Four additional indicators were added following 
feedback: these included schools as a community space, and estimated furlough (or furlough 
vulnerability) rate, which were included within the final selected indicators. After this, the indicator 
selection and the scale of the calculations taken forward were pragmatic, given the responsive 
timescale. Datasets which could be covered using data on rural resilience14 were considered, and 
priority datasets were identified within the seven themes. Thematic links were selected and adapted 
(e.g. the “Availability of high-speed broadband and communications” dataset was linked to the 
‘Transport/Migration’ theme as well as ‘Other’); the neatened dataset name “Infrastructure 
associated with medical, emergency, everyday resilience” was also changed to “Places supporting 
community resilience, including schools”. 
The index of local resilience to Covid-19 impacts was calculated from nine specific indicators, drawn 
from seven of the neat datasets and dataset themes, and representing five out of the seven themes 
related to enabling factors of resilience to the impacts of Covid-19 (Table 1). The selections 
correspond to previously discussed aims for forward-looking indicators, rather than those focused 
on lockdown, and avoiding indicators of vulnerability, but possibly capturing resilience and 
addressing needs of vulnerable groups. They include: 
 
13 Meador, J., Wilson, R. Spencer, M., Currie, M. (2020) Identifying Hot Spots of Rural Resilience in Scotland. 
10.5281/zenodo.3733112. 
14 Publicly available data: Spencer, M., Meador, E., Wilson, R. (2019) Identifying Hot Spots in Rural Community 
Resilience in Scotland – database. 10.5281/zenodo.3386198. 
29 
 
▪ two estimates of the impact of Covid-19 on the local economy: the change in the claimant count 
from pre-pandemic months to during the first wave in 2020, and an estimate of the vulnerability 
of residents to being on furlough, based on the local industry-level employment structure. 
▪ local demographic characteristics: medium-term population change and the old age dependency 
ratio. 
▪ the number of local places and facilities which are linked to social capital and the care of 
potentially vulnerable people: active charities which have a local focus; places supporting 
community resilience (halls and community centres, gymnasiums, sports halls and leisure 
centres, community networks and projects, pubs, bars and inns) plus schools; and providers of 
childcare (child care agency, child minding, day care of children) and care for older people (nurse 
agency, adult placement service, support service, care home service). 
▪ the availability of fast broadband. 
The index was calculated15 for Data Zones in rural areas and small towns16 and used a transparent 
and simple scoring, with indicator values converted to a score from one to three (predominantly 
using thirds): higher values represent stronger or more desirable outcomes. For 1,981 Data Zones 
(out of 2,067) with complete data for all nine indicators, the index was calculated as a sum of these 
scores, which has a theoretical range of 10-30. A Scotland-level map of the index and interactive 
dashboard were presented to the project team; the mapping also highlighted the extent of sparsely 
populated areas within Scotland17 as a second factor to consider in case study selection. The 
recommendation to the group was to select case study locations using the index and the team’s 
collective research experience in rural Scotland. Key questions to consider for case study selection 
were: a) where is there a large difference in values, either over a sh