Assessing the role of farm-level adaptation in limiting the local economic impacts of more frequent extreme weather events in Dutch arable farming systems

VU Research Portal
Assessing the role of farm-level adaptation in limiting the local economic impacts of
more frequent extreme weather events in Dutch arable farming systems
Diogo, V.; Reidsma, P.; Schaap, B.; Koomen, E.
published in
Book of abstracts
2017
document version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication in VU Research Portal
citation for published version (APA)
Diogo, V., Reidsma, P., Schaap, B., & Koomen, E. (2017). Assessing the role of farm-level adaptation in limiting
the local economic impacts of more frequent extreme weather events in Dutch arable farming systems. In N.
Fodor (Ed.), Book of abstracts: MACSUR 2017 Science Conference (pp. 62). (FACCE MACSUR Reports; Vol.
10, No. supplement)..
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ?
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
E-mail address:
vuresearchportal.ub@vu.nl
Download date: 22. May. 2021
Book of Abstracts                                                          MACSUR Science Conference 2017, 22–24 May, Berlin 
 
 
Topic: Projecting climate change impacts on agriculture in European regions 
Submitting author: Diogo, Vasco 
E-mail address: vdiogo@feweb.vu.nl 
Affiliation: VU Amsterdam, Netherlands 
 
 
Assessing the role of farm-level adaptation in limiting the local economic impacts 
of more frequent extreme weather events in Dutch arable farming systems. 
Diogo, V., P. Reidsma, B. Schaap, E. Koomen 
The expected increase in extreme events frequency is likely to considerably affect future crop 
productivity. Appropriate adaptation measures in agricultural systems should be identified 
according to the main climate risks expected in a region and taking into account the role of 
decisions made at the farm level.  Yet,  there  is limited  understanding  of  the  interplay  between 
local  production  capabilities,  regional  climatic  changes and  more  general  socio-economic 
conditions. We propose a method that combines local productivity factors, economic factors, 
crop-specific sensitivity to climatic extremes, and climate change scenarios, to assess future 
economic impacts of extreme events on agricultural systems. Our assessment is spatially explicit 
and uses discounted time series of cash flows taking into account expected impacts on yield and 
crop quality, to estimate changes in the expected net present value of agricultural systems. We 
also assess the economic feasibility of a portfolio of adaptation measures by considering their 
initial investments, annual costs, and effectiveness in reducing crop damage. We apply the 
method to investigate potential economic impacts of extreme events in arable farming systems 
in the Netherlands in period around 2050. We find that the expected increase in frequency can 
substantially undermine the economic viability of Dutch arable farming systems. The results 
indicate considerable differences among regions: some regions are severely impacted by all 
extremes, while others consistently demonstrate high resilience. Though the exact magnitude of 
the impacts remains highly uncertain, adaptation measures should nevertheless be regarded as 
no-regret strategies, since they alleviate both economic impacts and uncertainty around impact 
magnitude. 
 
