Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socio-economic changes in the Ifugao Region (Philippines)/Adaptación del cultivo de arroz a los cambios climáticos y socioeconómicos en la región de Ifugao (Filipinas)

Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
1 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
 
Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socio-economic 
changes in the Ifugao Region (Philippines) 
Adaptación del cultivo de arroz a los cambios climáticos y socioeconómicos en la 
región de Ifugao (Filipinas) 
Julie Hermesse. 
Catholic University of Louvain, Louvain. Belgium. 
E – mail: julie.hermesse@uclouvain.be 
______________________ 
Recibido: 23 de marzo de 2017. 
Aceptado: 6 de abril de 2017. 
Summary 
The object of this article is to analyze the forms and limits of adaptation of the region’s 
rice cultivation combined with the changing local ecological conditions and a changing 
socio-economic environment. Based on ethnographical studies undertaken among 
Ifugao people in the Philippines, this paper aims at contributing to produce knowledge 
about the construction of rice agricultural practices forced to adapt to socio-economic 
and climate change. However, six years after having classified the site as a patrimony of 
humanity, UNESCO, announced its concern for these rice terraces by including them on 
the list of world heritage sites in danger. Indeed, the Batad rice terraces are showing 
signs of deterioration. The destruction of rice terraces and the fragile ecosystem they 
rely on, would generate a disaster, not in terms of loss of human life, but in agricultural 
and cultural terms.  
Keywords: adaptation, socio-economic change, climate change, rice, Ifugao. 
Resumen 
El objetivo de este artículo es analizar las formas y los límites de adaptación del cultivo 
de arroz de la región combinado con las cambiantes condiciones ecológicas locales y un 
entorno socioeconómico cambiante. Para ello se basa en estudios etnográficos 
realizados entre personas de Ifugao en las Filipinas e intenta contribuir a producir 
conocimiento sobre la construcción de prácticas agrícolas de arroz obligadas a adaptarse 
al cambio socioeconómico y climático. Sin embargo, seis años después de haber 
clasificado el sitio como patrimonio de la humanidad, la UNESCO anunció su 
preocupación por estas terrazas de arroz al incluirlas en la lista de sitios del patrimonio 
mundial en peligro. De hecho, las terrazas de arroz de Batad muestran signos de 
deterioro. La destrucción de las terrazas de arroz y el frágil ecosistema del que 
dependen generaría un desastre, no en términos de pérdida de vidas humanas, sino en 
términos agrícolas y culturales.  
Palabras clave: adaptación, cambio socio-económico, cambio climático, arroz, Ifugao. 
 
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
2 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
 
Introduction 
The Republic of the Philippines is a country consisting of an archipelago of 7,107 
islands, with eleven of them containing over 90% of the land and only 2,000 of them 
inhabited. Three zones are to be distinguished: Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. The zone 
of Luzon is considered to be a zone historically affected by typhoons. 
This paper is based on ethnographic investigations carried out in the North of the Island 
of Luzon, more precisely, in the (barangay) district of Batad1(municipality of Banaue) 
which is in Ifugao province, itself located in the Cordillera Administrative Region. On 
the methodological level, the data was gathered during participative observations, 
observative participations in the rice terraces and in-depth interviews. 
The term Ifugao, the name of the province is associated with the populations living 
there, indicates a group of wet rice growers of Malayan origin occupying the mountains 
of Northern Luzon. This population is one of the most intensely studied among 
Southeast Asian societies (Conklin 1980), among other things, for their extremely 
complex terraced rice growing system. The peasants still produce wet rice (rice grown 
in flooded ground as opposed to what is called “dry” rice production). This 
technological prowess testifies to a harmony of cultural activities in rhythm with the 
climate and water management, which allows the peasants to make rice grow at over 
1,000 meters of altitude. 
The principal occupation of this Ifugao peasantry is producing wet rice for self-
consumption (Scott 1958). The size and quality of the rice terraces, inherited by 
primogeniture, symbolizes the family’s economic status and social rank in the 
community. If they do not own rice terraces, the peasants acquire rice in exchange for 
their labour. Yet only the traditional chieftaincies had the habit of eating rice three times 
a day. For the remainder, their diet was essentially completed by sweet potatoes, as it is 
today by commercial rice. 
Distributed in various sitios on the mountain slopes, the Batad population numbers 
around 1 024 inhabitants for 1 240 ha (National Statistics Office, 2010). The domestic 
units raise farmyard animals and cattle as well as cultivating vegetables on burned areas 
above the rice terraces. Although rice cultivation remains a central element, the Ifugao 
have been taking their place on the labour market since World War Two in diversifying 
their non-agricultural economic activities (working in the mines, road construction, 
agro-industry). 
The Batad rice terraces have been classified as a world heritage site by UNESCO since 
1995 and also figure among Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Sites (GIAHS)2. 
                                                            
1 Batad is located 350 km from Manilla, or around 10 hours by bus from the capitol in Banaue, one hour 
in jeepney from Banaue to Saddle Point and an hour’s walk from Saddle Point to the barangay or district 
of Batad 
2 These rice terraces are one element in an integral indigenous Ifugao agro-ecosystem (Jianchu and 
Ruscoe, 1993). Among other things, rice production is made possible thanks to the Muyong’s indigenous 
management skills, an agroforestry system situated upstream from each group of terraces and allowing 
their irrigation and fertilization. This collectively managed forested zone which is to be found above the 
terraces contains roughly 264 species of indigenous plants, mainly endemic to the region. 
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
3 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
However, six years after having classified the site as a patrimony of humanity, 
UNESCO, announced its concern for these rice terraces by including them on the list of 
world heritage sites in danger3 List of World Heritage in Danger). UNESCO underlines 
the lack of political measures taken to help the Ifugao preserve their terraces. 
The Batad rice terraces are showing signs of deterioration. In 1990, a severe earthquake 
damaged some of the terraces’ irrigation systems, while the El Niño climatic 
phenomenon has caused droughts, allowing enormous earthworms to erode the terraces’ 
soil. In 2011, a combination of drought and heavy rain caused landslides and the 
collapse of entire sections of walls in the principal amphitheater of Batad, as well as an 
opposite slope in 2013.  
As part of the Cordillera, the Batad Mountains serve as a rampart against typhoons. But 
the peasants are subjected to torrential rains generated by the typhoons. Typhoons are so 
frequent that they may readily be said to form part of daily life in the rainy season. Still 
the inhabitants are astonished to see typhoons forming outside the periods they were 
usually limited to4: “there were typhoons before, but in a seasonal way, meaning during 
a limited period of time. But now, there are typhoons all the time. What people say is 
that the typhoons have multiplied” (Fourth Assessment Report, 2007, p.  9). 
The destruction of rice terraces (in being abandoned or through lack of maintenance, or 
through natural phenomena such as El Niño or typhoons) and the fragile ecosystem they 
rely on, would generate a disaster, not in terms of loss of human life, but in agricultural 
and cultural terms. The object of this article is to analyze the forms and limits of 
adaptation of the region’s rice cultivation (to be understood in the polysemous sense of 
the term: agricultural operations and cultural elements) combined with the changing 
local ecological conditions (among which climate) and a changing socio-economic and 
cultural environment. These reflections will allow us to suggest prospective scenarios 
regarding the survivability of the local rice growing peasantry and their skills on the 
subject of this ecosystem. 
The destruction of rice terraces (in being abandoned or through lack of maintenance, or 
through natural phenomena such as El Niño or typhoons) and the fragile ecosystem they 
rely on, would generate a disaster, not in terms of loss of human life, but in agricultural 
and cultural terms. The object of this article is to analyze the forms and limits of 
adaptation of the region’s rice cultivation (to be understood in the polysemous sense of 
the term: agricultural operations and cultural elements) combined with the changing 
local ecological conditions (among which climate) and a changing socio-economic and 
cultural environment. These reflections will allow us to suggest prospective scenarios 
                                                            
3 In 2002, President Arroyo transferred jurisdiction of development of the terraces from the Department of 
Agriculture to the Department of Tourism. Yet, while tourism provides additional revenue for the 
farmers, these terraces nonetheless remain above all agricultural lands. 
4 With precaution, the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC describes the  correlation between the 
probability of a human contribution and increases in the intensity of tropical cyclonic activity as “more 
likely than not” (“The Physical Science  Basis, Summary for Policymakers”, in IPCC, Fourth Assessment 
Report, 2007, p.  9). As to the Fifth Evaluatory Report of the GIEC (2013), it refutes the preceding 
hypothesis. According to the authors of the chapter “Detection and Attribution of Climate Change: from 
Global to Regional” of the report “The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I”, the 
confidence level would be low as to long term increases in tropical cyclonic activity (Bindoff et al., 2013, 
pp.  913-914). Uncertainty also remains as to whether or not natural inter-annual variability has affected 
past changes in the domain of cyclonic activity. 
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
4 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
regarding the survivability of the local rice growing peasantry and their skills on the 
subject of this ecosystem. 
Materials and methods  
On the methodological level, the data was gathered during participative observations in 
the rice terraces and in-depth interviews. It should be noted that the ethnographical work 
carried out in the last fieldwork in January 2015 took place during the sowing period. 
Accompanying the women in the rice terraces led to me work in much closer proximity 
to them. Also were used methods of the theoretical level of knowledge as analytical - 
synthetic, inductive - deductive and historical - logical, among others, to interpret the 
information and describe the results. 
Results & Discussion  
With the domestication and selection of seed having existed for millenia, for the Ifugao, 
rice is a spiritual bridge with ancestors who, over the centuries, honed their skills 
through trial and error (Santiaguel 2010). Rice thus forms part of the Region’s culture 
and identity, as do the splendid rice terraces the ancestors carved out of the mountain 
slopes. Understanding evolutions in the recourse made to varieties of rice allows us to 
question the durability and biodiversity of rice growing systems in the mountains. 
Produced in an entirely ecological manner, tinawon rice is one of the inherited aromatic 
native rices suited to this cold climate zone. Requiring six months to grow to maturity, it 
is only cultivated once a year. A wide genetic variety of tinawon exists.  
With a view to optimizing agricultural production and improving the livelihoods of 
populations, in the 1970’s, the Ifugao Government encouraged the introduction of new 
varieties and a second harvest a year. Mechanization being impossible in this region, 
“agricultural modernization” was carried out in adopting new, faster growing seed 
varieties.  
The inhabitants of Batad describe this adaptation to new rice varieties as a long term 
and non-coercive propagation process. Its lack of resistance to disease and pests (rodent, 
birds and molluscs) attracted by its odour when flowering, were given by the peasants 
as some of the reasons discouraging them from sowing that variety of the ancient, 
aromatic rice. Rices not-originating in those rice terraces (such as California rice) were 
little by little adapted to the altitude by the peasants. Those rices are appreciated for 
their high yield (from 7 to 12 panicles, whereas the old rices had between 3 to 7) and a 
shorter growing period (one hundred days from sowing) compared to native rice, 
allowing an increase in yearly harvests (Sekimoto and Louis, 2012).  
In Batad, there is a constant interest in experimenting with new seed. A certain rice, 
called “Sifor”, was for example adopted in Batad a few years ago and then abandoned. 
A peasant explained that its “skin” was too thick: “Hard to pound and hard 
to decompose”. 
Besides having to be resilient to hydroclimatic threats (typhoons and drought periods), 
the rice sown in the rice terraces below the hamlets (sitios) must prove to be largely 
unaffected by the polluted water draining in there. The faecal waters, formerly 
considered a natural fertilizer, today include waste waters containing cleaning products. 
“The native rice is more fragile”, say the peasants. Those who continue planting it have 
plots downstream from the hamlets, described as being more fertile.   
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
5 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
It is by observing the crops and harvests of peasants from other areas and, subsequently, 
of closer neighbors, that the adoption of new varieties is slowly undertaken. Sowing 
new seed is the fruit of exchanges between peasants, by barter (for a bundle of another 
variety), or through labour in the field. If the International Rice Research Institut (IRRI), 
and until recently the Central Cordillera Agricultural Programme (CECAP), played a 
key local role as regards biogenetic research, in the end it is hard to know who 
introduced the new varieties. Choosing the varieties to be sown remains the peasants’ 
prerogative.  
Offsetting this miraculous new productivity, is a downturn in varietal diversity5. If over 
70 varieties of tinawon were listed in the 1970’s, A. Druguet (2009) was only able to 
observe about thirty varieties during his investigations. The last census of patrimonial 
rices (heirloom rice varieties grown in the rice terraces of the Cordillera) was carried out 
by the Department of Agriculture (DA) in the Cordiella Administrative Region in 2009 
(Domoguen 2011).  
The DA list suggests that native rice biodiversity losses in the provinces of Kalinga, 
Ifugao and Mountain Province: “closely associated to the people’s culture and 
traditions, the cultivation of heirloom rice in the terraces led to the development of 
indigenous and sustainable natural resources management, particularly the preservation 
of watersheds, in situ food biodiversity, village social capital, festivals and others” 
(Domoguen 2011). For these reasons, after having sought the distribution of high output 
varieties, the DA is now encouraging a return to inherited rices. The DA is now asking 
the heirloom rice growing municipalities and provinces of the Region to prepare their 
own rice self-sufficiency roadmaps6. 
Incorporating these new faster growth varieties, as well as transplanting techniques, into 
the rice growing system, led to the possibility of having two harvests per year. 
However, in the 1990’s, although the production of camote decreased and the demand 
for rice increased7, with the Ifugao population augmenting appreciably, the double 
harvest system was little by little abandoned in Batad. In such a context, it is interesting 
to find out why most of the peasants returned to a single harvest. 
The number of harvests, a symbol of evolutions in rice growing 
The increase in the number of annual rice harvests generates questions relating to 
climate records and human resources. Accompanying agricultural activities by rites and 
                                                            
5 A study calls into question the loss of agricultural biodiversity due to the development of modern 
varieties (Steel et al., 2009). The results of researchers of Field Crops Research show that the global 
genetic diversity has increased thanks to new varieties which have incorporated different, non-existent 
genes into local species. Yet assessment of this additional enrichment of genes should be tempered. These 
scientists concluded that the genetic diversity can only increase to the extent that a proportion of around 
40% of cultivated land preserves traditional varieties. An increase in genetic diversity is thus only 
possible if the rate of adoption of hybrid varieties (resulting from a cross between local seed and exotic 
varieties) remains partial. Thus the introduction of modern hybrid seed does not eliminate the question of 
preserving traditional varieties. 
6 This is particularly in response to the national programme «One Town, One Product», a project which 
consists in economically valorising one main agricultural product in each municipality. 
7 Another source of proteins is the camote (Ipomoea batatas L.), or sweet potato, cultivated upstream the 
rice terraces or on mountain flanks not given over to rice growing. Introduced by the Spanish colonizers, 
the camote is a security staple for the Ifugao in case of poor rice harvests. But its production in Batad has 
been reduced to nearly nothing in the last few decades following an uncontrollable and uncontrolled 
invasive plague, still uncontrolled today. 
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
6 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
ceremonies by mumbaki (shamans), to be defined in the socio-cultural domain, will not 
be dealt with here.  
a) Climatic aspects  
The new varieties of rice, sown twice a year, are sown around the months of September 
and March and harvested around January and July. The second harvest is thus sown 
during the rainy season (ranging from June to November) which coincides with the 
typhoon season (from June to October). Varieties of rices which grow in continuously 
flooded ground are varieties with rather long stems. These varieties are vulnerable to 
strong wind and heavy rains, explains a peasant: “During the rainy season, the grains 
don’t develop well… There are not enough grains of rice in the ear. That’s due to 
typhoons and wind during the flowering. For if the flower is soaked, the development is 
interrupted and there’s no pollination.”  
Yet the Batad peasants remark that the new varieties of rice, like the California, have 
sturdier stems. But the negative aspect of that sturdiness is a slower decomposition than 
the native rices. And in Batad, where chemical additives have not yet been introduced, 
the stems, once the terrace has been harvested, are mixed with mud as a natural 
fertilizer. A slow organic decomposition in turn slows down the rice terrace’s 
fertilization, resulting in a second harvest of lesser quality.  
The uncertainty of the climate in these latitudes is a given with which indigenous Ifugao 
populations have always had to cope, among other things by organizing annual religious 
festivities. But according to local talk, extreme weather conditions (such as downpours, 
typhoons, droughts, and extremely cold temperatures and fog) are intensifying today, 
with climate change exacerbating the rice terraces’ vulnerability (Ngidlo, 2013). The 
role research in agricultural sciences and, more particularly, seed companies will have 
in the future development of varieties with high levels of tolerance for combinations of 
climate stresses is certainly not negligible8. 
Extreme weather events as well as the decomposition of the plants have led to a 
readjustment of the agricultural calendar, with many Batad peasants abandoning a 
second harvest. In addition to repairs of the rice plantation’s irrigation systems and 
walls, the availability of labor to ensure a second harvest must also be taken into 
consideration. 
A. Human resource aspects  
For the rice to grow under good conditions, there is the preliminary matter of preparing 
the rice terraces: cleaning the small levees and repairing the walls, pulling the weeds 
and mixing them into mud as fertilizer, gathering the devastating “golden cohols” and 
crushing their eggs, etc. Once rice terraces are ready to accommodate the rice, the 
young seedlings, sown beforehand in seedbeds, are meticulously uprooted and gathered 
in bundles. This female task, as well as the planting to come, involves their spending 
long days bent over with their hands in water. Growing immersed rice (transplanting, 
                                                            
8 Some researchers also underline the interest lying in research in the domain of sciences and technologies 
whose goal is increasing the yield and reducing the maturing time of traditional rice varieties, doing so, 
for example by increasing soil fertilities (Allig and Babang, 2015). 
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
7 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
cleaning the terraces, choosing the seed, planting…) is done by women, while work 
involving irrigation and repairing the rice terrace walls is done by men. 
In this traditionally self-subsistent community, situated outside of a market economy 
until World War Two (Jianchu and Ruscoe, 1993), abandoning a second harvest has 
provided the peasants the time to engage in lucrative activities. The introduction of 
obligatory schooling in the 1950’s had crucial repercussions on the self-sufficient mode 
of production and cash requirements. While the primary school requires little financial 
commitment on the parents’ behalf, the secondary school generates costs the peasant 
families cannot absorb with their agricultural practices of self-consumption. Once 
through primary school, students continuing their schooling must reside outside the 
barangay (district) of Batad. The parents prove to be imaginative in assuming the cost of 
boarding school9 (700PHP/month) plus school fees: migration to Banaue in the tourism 
sector, to Baguio for work in the seasonal market gardening sector of the agro-industry, 
or to Manila in hopes of finding work there or abroad. 
Exiting the peasantry thanks to education is perceived as an upward social mobility 
giving access to the comfort the consumption of material goods allows: “If you do 
nothing but work in rice, you won’t have enough to pay for your children’s studies; 
you’ll have just enough to eat rice. However, plagues, typhoons and rats may come and 
destroy all your crops. If you have a job, you can work in the rice terraces weekends or 
pay people to do it for you.” Cristina, helped by her husband, opened a shop to sell 
small-scale local handicrafts intended for tourists come to admire terraces classified as a 
world heritage site by UNESCO. Out of her eight brothers and sisters, Cristina is the 
only one not to have finished her studies at college and still living in Batad. All of her 
siblings have migrated to follow professional paths outside the community. They no 
longer contribute, so to speak, their physical force to agricultural tasks. They regularly 
send their mother money to hire labor at the time of heavy agricultural tasks (cleaning 
the rice terraces, planting, harvesting). 
The young generations look down on field work: “Children no longer want to get their 
hands dirty. Before we made tools to match their size, but that no longer interests 
children today”, explains Julia, sexagenerian. A Carmelite Sister in a barangay near 
Batad says: “the young people could learn it but they are no longer interested in this 
kind of work. They’ve gotten lazy. It’s no longer attractive for them. And there’s 
nothing to do here, no karaoke, no stores… few ways of earning money. And money’s 
what’s become the most important thing. Without money, you can’t move.”  
Transmitting specialized techniques, like repairing the walls of rice terraces, runs into 
obstacles, such as young men disinterested in being taught by older men and the 
rarefaction of elderly having that know-how. However, in the absence of regular 
observation and repetition of those gestures, the techniques are lost. Cristina’s eldest 
son, Buya, is looking for work. His mother would have proposed to him that he learn 
the technique of repairing rice terrace walls from his great-uncle, but Buya refused to 
take interest in those delicate and depreciated operations, preferring instead to work as a 
farm laborer in the agro-industry sector.  
With the income generated by tourism, Batad today can count on finding an 
increasingly limited agricultural labor force among its inhabitants. Whereas a woman’s 
                                                            
9 The exchange rate of the Philippino Peso is 1 PHP = $0.02 US (December 2015). 
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
8 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
salary for one day's work is 150 PHP (250 PHP for a man) and the earnings for an hour 
of massage, given to a tourist, for example, is 300 PHP, what peasant would be crazy 
enough to persevere exclusively along the path of rice growing? The diversification of 
professional activities other than agriculture for some, coupled with the desertion of rice 
growing for others, has reduced the production of local rice -generated mainly in only 
one harvest and no longer in two. This restricted production of rice has led to the need 
for rice known as ‘commercial’ being supplied from outside. This new type of purchase 
can only be assured by having a source of income. 
Final considerations 
In addition to abandoning patrimonial varieties, speaking more broadly, the cultivating 
of rice in this mountainous environment - as such - is threatened. We see abandoned rice 
terraces in some nearby barangays. This abandon may be explained by problems of 
access to water to irrigate the rice terraces, by major migratory flows towards cities but 
also by negligence in maintaining the small levees. Totally abandoning the rice terraces 
is a scenario which would place this priceless thousand-year-old heritage in danger and 
would thereby stop the tourist surge which, despite its often quarrelsome repercussions 
within the population of Batad, generates a considerable amount of money.  
The peasants of Batad adapt their sowing to their needs for yield and resilience, with 
some leaving their rice terraces to ensure their offspring better professional 
opportunities. In fact centuries old lifestyles are thus being called into question to allow 
them to access what modernity seems to offer. But going to school is not enough to 
create a place for oneself in the active Filipino population, whose demography is 
galloping. Rex, a recent graduate, explained to me: “to find a job as a male nurse, 
there’s a long list ahead of me. I do small jobs left and right, as best I can.”  A rural 
exodus towards a promised city seemed to be the panacea. But as the cities and the 
capital fill up, shantytowns spring up. Isn't it time to think about how to live better in the 
rural world?  
Isn’t it time to reflect on the organization of these peasant communities in order to avoid 
their desertion and, possibly, encourage returning migrants to take up agricultural 
activities? In turning their attention to alternative rural transformation dynamics (in 
highlighting their uncertainties, possibilities and complexity), researchers play an 
important role in imagining possible futures (Gibson, Cahill and McKay 2010). 
The durability of systems of peasant agriculture is asked alongside the question of the 
diversification of activities in the agricultural operations concerned, like the delicate 
question of tourism: it allows us to maintain this peasant agriculture but also weakens it 
(by ostentatiously exposing the incomes tourism generates in comparison with 
agricultural incomes). The fragility of this ecosystem subjected to increasing 
demography, climate change, cultural and religious transformations and the flight of 
manpower attracts our attention to “hybrid forms of agricultural production” (Deléage, 
2012). 
“Food biodiversity is the work of men”, to take up an aphorism formulated by John 
Tuxill and cited by Gary Paul Nabhan (2009). It relies on cultural and agricultural 
practices and “coevolves” with the human communities maintaining them in space and 
time (Brac de la Perrière, 2014). But the ethnic minorities who have contributed to 
developing this food biodiversity and preserving it are mistreated by our productivist 
capitalist system, which leaves them no other fate than urban emigration. We thus 
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
9 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
heartily agree with the remarks of Larrère and Larrère (2009) on government’s need to 
link nature and politics and to associate local populations with the protection of 
biological diversity:  
          To achieve sustainable development, local populations need the protection of a 
solid national political structure10 against an international market which 
threatens to destroy any of their activities which are not “competitive”. As we 
have seen, imagining that local populations, directly confronted with the market, 
will preserve their traditional practices through a noble ecological conscience 
would amount to resurrecting the myth of the noble savage. (p. 306) 
These reflections should lead us to think of a logic of remuneration for competencies in 
agricultural domains which would perhaps slow down the massive rural exodus. These 
considerations have led us to reflect on alternative logics for remunerating the peasants 
which, beyond the question of yield in resources per unit, would take evaluation of the 
positive externalities of peasant practices into account (an equilibrium of ecosystems, 
soil fertilities, an environment favoring social interactions, water conservation…). 
Ifugao Province is in full mutation today but its inhabitants have shown great aptitude 
for reconciling tradition and modernity (Druguet 2009). This case study stresses the 
need for preserving indigenous know-how while remaining open to the outside. This 
peasant rice cultivation underlines the need for a balance between several factors:  
- Access to natural resources in respecting the ecosystem’s equilibrium (in breaking 
with a predatory and exclusively productivist logic); 
- A stable climate (but threatened with typhoons and droughts); 
- An availability of manpower and a transmission of know-how; 
- The lifestyle aspirations of younger generations. 
Climate change will certainly have negative effects on rice crop production (Stigter and 
Winarto 2013) and harm this agro-ecological equilibrium (Ngidlo 2013), but cultural 
changes (as, for example, the desertion of rice growing work) and technical changes 
will be more rapid and perhaps more devastating. Climate change will amplify the 
acceleration of conditions of socio-economic vulnerability (Oliver-Smith 2013). Hence 
we should not dissociate the analysis of socio-economic change, from analysis of the 
environmental change and we should ensure, as Ben J. Wallace (2006, p. 28) notes, 
“that people stand at the center of research and development in culture and agriculture”. 
                                                            
10 The Convention on Biological Diversity (coming into force in 1993) recognizes the sovereign right of 
States to profit from and control the use of their genetic resources and traditional skills. As Larrère and 
Larrère (2009) remark, that quite obviously raises the question of the corruption of numerous developing 
nations 
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
10 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
 
 
References  
Ammayao, A, and Gene Hettel. (2003). Let’s hope the bile is good. In The Art of Rice: 
Spirit and Sustenance in Asia. Hamilton Roy, ed. Pp. 450-468. Los Angeles: UCLA 
Fowler Museum of Cultural History. 
Allig, Teresita D. (N.d.). Comparative Growth & Yield Performance of Traditionally 
Grown and Science &Technology-based Grown Heirloom (Imbu-okan var.) in Ifugao.  
Bindoff, Nathaniel L., and Peter A. Stott.  (coord.) (2013). Detection and Attribution 
of Climate Change: from Global to Regional. In Climate Change 2013: The Physical 
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (Stocker Thomas F., Qin  and Gian-
Kasper Plattner, eds.), 867-952. Cambridge and New York : Cambridge University 
Press. 
Cabreza, Vincent (2013). A New Plan to Revive Famous Ifugao Terraces. Inquirer 
Northern Luzon, May 28.  
Conklin, Harold C. (1980). Ethnographic Atlas of Ifugao: A Study of Environment, 
Culture, and Society in Northern Luzon. New Haven and London: Yale University 
Press. 
Deléage, E. (2012) Les paysans dans la modernité. Revue Française de Socio-
Économie, 1(9), 117-131.   
Domoguen, R. L. (2011) Cordillera Losing Its Heirloom Rice Varieties. The Sun Star 
Baguio Newspaper, March 01. 
Druguet, A. (2009).  La commercialisation du riz tinawon Ifugao (Philippines): vers une 
recomposition sociale et territoriale? Paper presented at the International symposium: 
Localizing Products: a Sustainable Approach for Natural and Cultural Diversity in the 
South? Paris, June 9-11. 
Edelman, M. (2013). What is a peasant? What are peasantries? A briefing paper on 
issues of definition, Paper presented at the first session of the Intergovernmental 
Working Group on a United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and Other 
People Working in Rural Areas, Geneva, July 15-19. 
Gibson, K, Cahill, A, and McKay, D. (2010). Rethinking the dynamics of rural 
transformation: performing different development pathways in a Philippine 
municipality. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 35(2), 237–255. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2007). Fourth Assessment 
Report, Climate Change 2007. Accessed November 28, 2015, retreived from 
http://www.pewclimate.org/global-warming-basics/ipccar4.cfm. 
Jianchu, X, and  Ruscoe, M. (1993). The Use of Indigenous Knowledge in 
Agroecosystem for Biodiversity Conservation; A Case Study in Barangay Haliap, 
Kiangan, Ifugao, Central Cordillera, Philippines. Los Baños: University of the 
Philippines Los Banos and Ford Foundation. 
Monteverdia, RNPS: 2189, ISSN: 2077-2890, 11(1), pp. 1-11, enero-junio 2018 
Centro de Estudios de Gestión Ambiental. Universidad de Camagüey “Ignacio Agramonte Loynaz”. Camagüey. Cuba 
11 
Hermesse                                            Adaptation of rice cultivation to climate and socioeconomic  
                                                            change in the Ifugo Region (Philippines)  
 
Larrère, C, and Larrère, R. (2009). Du bon usage de la nature. Pour une philosophie de 
l’environnement. Paris: Flammarion.  
Nabhan, G. P. (2009). Where Our Food Comes From: Retracing Nikolay Vavilov's 
Quest to End Famine. Washington D.C: Island Press. 
Oliver-Smith, A. (2013). Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation: The 
View from Applied Anthropology. Human Organization, 72(4): 275-282. 
Ngidlo, R. T. (2013). Assessment of Climate Change Impacts, Vulnerabilities and 
Adaptation Strategies in the Traditional Rice Terraces of the Cordillera Region, 
Northern Philippines. Asian Journal of Science and Technology, 4(11): 180-186. 
National Statistics Office. (2010). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and 
Barangay: as of May 1, 2010. 2010 Census of Population and Housing.  
http://web0.psa.gov.ph/sites/default/files/attachments/hsd/pressrelease/Cordillera%20A
dministrative%20Region.pdf, accessed November 28, 2015. 
Santiaguel, A. F. (2010). The seed keepers’ treasure. Rice Today, October-November: 
12-15.   
Scott, W. H. (1958). A Preliminary Report on Upland Rice in Northern Luzon. 
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 14(1), 87-105.  
Sekimoto, S., and Augustin-Jean Louis. (1958) An Export Niche in the Philippines: the 
Commodification of the Speciality Rice in Ifugao Province. In Geographical Indications 
and International Agriculture Trade. The Challenge for Asia. Augustin-Jean Louis, 
Hélène Ilbert and Neantro Saavedra-Rivano. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Stigter, Kees, and Yunita Winarto. (2013) Rice and Climate Change: Adaptation or 
Mitigation? Facts for Policy Designs. A Choice from What Recent Summaries Say and 
Some Critical Additions for Use with Indonesian Farmers. International Society for 
Agricultural Meteorology, 2013. http://www.agrometeorology.org/topics/climate-
change/rice-and-climate-change-adaption-or-mitigation-facts-for-policy-designs, 
accessed November 28, 2015. 
Wallace, Ben J. (2006). Keeping People in Culture and Agriculture. Culture and 
Agriculture, 28(1):28-31. 
UNESCO archives. Accessed November 28, 2013. Retrieved from 
http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/722/ 
