Collaborative Resilience to Episodic Shocks and Surprises: A Very Long-Term Case Study of Zanjera Irrigation in the Philippines 1979–2010

Soc. Sci. 2015, 4, 469–498; doi:10.3390/socsci4030469 
 
social sciences 
ISSN 2076-0760 
www.mdpi.com/journal/socsci 
Article 
Collaborative Resilience to Episodic Shocks and Surprises:  
A Very Long-Term Case Study of Zanjera Irrigation in the 
Philippines 1979–2010 
Ruth Yabes 1,† and Bruce Evan Goldstein 2,†,* 
1 School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning, Arizona State University, PO Box 875302, 
Tempe, AZ 85287-5302, USA; E-Mail: Ruth.Yabes@asu.edu 
2 School of Environment and Sustainability, Programs in Environmental Design and Environmental 
Studies, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 8030, USA 
† These authors contributed equally to this work. 
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: E-Mail: Brugo@colorado.edu;  
Tel.: +1-720-346-4957; Fax: +1-303-492-6163. 
Academic Editor: Oliver Ibert 
Received: 1 November 2014 / Accepted: 2 July 2015 / Published: 7 July 2015 
 
Abstract: This thirty-year case study uses surveys, semi-structured interviews, and content 
analysis to examine the adaptive capacity of Zanjera San Marcelino, an indigenous 
irrigation management system in the northern Philippines. This common pool resource 
(CPR) system exists within a turbulent social-ecological system (SES) characterized by 
episodic shocks such as large typhoons as well as novel surprises, such as national political 
regime change and the construction of large dams. The Zanjera nimbly responded to these 
challenges, although sometimes in ways that left its structure and function substantially 
altered. While a partial integration with the Philippine National Irrigation Agency was 
critical to the Zanjera’s success, this relationship required on-going improvisation and 
renegotiation. Over time, the Zanjera showed an increasing capacity to learn and adapt. A 
core contribution of this analysis is the integration of a CPR study within an SES framework 
to examine resilience, made possible the occurrence of a wide range of challenges to the 
Zanjera’s function and survival over the long period of study. Long-term analyses like this 
one, however rare, are particularly useful for understanding the adaptive and transformative 
dimensions of resilience.  
OPEN ACCESS
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 470 
 
 
Keywords: Philippines; resilience; irrigation; collective; common pool resources; 
collaborative; social-ecological systems; surprise; shock 
 
1. Introduction 
This paper chronicles the resilience of an indigenous irrigation collective, Zanjera San Marcelino, 
by finding complementarity between theories of common pool resources (CPR) and social-ecological 
systems (SES). Zanjeras are communal, indigenous, self-governing irrigation systems in the Ilocos 
Norte region of the northern Philippines. Ostrom ([1], p. 90) draws attention to the long-term 
sustainability of zanjeras and their success in solving common-pool resource problems. She includes 
zanjeras among CPR institutions whose success and durability is tied to possessing clearly defined 
boundaries, congruence between appropriation rules and local conditions, collective-choice agreements, 
monitoring, graduated sanctions and conflict-resolution mechanisms. What is less well understood is how 
CPRs like zanjeras respond and adapt to changing institutional, ecological, and cultural conditions over 
time that demand more than an ability to recover from episodic shocks to avoid undesirable thresholds 
of change. Are participatory governance and a longstanding ability to respond to episodic shocks also 
associated with the capacity to generate novel alternatives and mobilize the resources required to adapt 
to surprises, shocks that are unprecedented and unanticipated? 
This case study engages this challenge of considering how community-based resource management 
can both persist and change over time. It follows the path that Ostrom [1] chose to engage the 
resilience literature to account for surprises that play out over multiple temporal, spatial and institutional 
scales. A contribution of this paper that supports this integration of a CPR within an SES perspective is 
the opportunity it provides to examine institutional resilience over 30 years, with observations drawn 
from episodes that challenged the viability of the Zanjera San Marcelino. Longitudinal analysis over 
this time scale is exceedingly rare, and is critical for understanding how institutions persist and adapt 
in response to episodic as well as novel disturbance.  
After an overview of our research methods, we provide a general history of zanjeras and describe 
how Zanjera San Marcelino deftly deployed longstanding rules and procedures to bounce back from 
episodic shocks throughout the 1970s, including typhoons, drought, and economic downturns. We then 
focus on how the Zanjera responded to a new national irrigation project in the 1980s that threatened to 
supersede the Zanjera’s ability to maintain its irrigation system. We consider how the Zanjera and the 
National Irrigation Administration of the Philippines (NIA) instead learned to accommodate one 
another during this time. We then address how the Zanjera adapted to surprises that threatened this 
accommodation during the 1990s and 2000s by reducing their integration with the NIA, and consider 
how the Zanjera is struggling in the 2010s to address a surprise that threatens its adaptive capacity.  
In the discussion, we connect the case narrative to the resilience literature on surprise and adaptive 
capacity to explore how collaborative community governance was critical to the Zanjera’s ability to 
persist as well as reflect, negotiate, and reconfigure. Contesting the idea that polycentric governance is 
in tension with strong community-based management [2], we conclude by considering how learning 
networks can enhance both internal and external connectivity. We suggest that learning networks can 
increase the autonomy and integrity of community-based collaborative governance by expanding the 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 471 
 
 
diversity of options, ideas, and practices that support innovation while enabling community coalitions 
to better navigate the tides of resilience across scale within a polycentric governance regime. 
Considered over thirty years, the continued existence of the Zanjera San Marcelino speaks for the 
continued utility of community-based resource management despite increasing system interconnectedness 
and dynamism, provided that communities are embedded within a supportive institutional milieu. 
2. Literature Review 
Ostrom [1] and colleagues describe how CPRs such as zanjeras provide resource users with the 
ability to govern their own exploitation of a relatively discrete natural resource pool in a sound and 
enduring way, despite individual incentives to free-ride. Their core insight was that sustainable 
resource use did not have to rely on private ownership or state control, as long as communities could 
devise and enforce collective rules and procedures about boundaries, authority, resource allocation, 
monitoring and sanctioning. Effective CPR communities were able to both conduct routine tasks like 
allocating limited natural resources and also address special circumstances, including recovery from 
episodic disturbances such as typhoons. A functioning CPR could normalize shocks by applying rules 
about how members should cooperate during recovery, such as Zanjera San Marcelino’s requirement 
that members share the burden of reduced capacity after a typhoon washed away irrigation structures 
while proportionately contributing labor and resources to rebuilding. 
Communities were the central locus of these CPR analyses, with other levels of government either 
left out altogether or described as sources of instability, through application of laws and regulations 
that conflicted with community procedures and rules [3]. However, over time, analysts began to 
incorporate a more nuanced appreciation for how higher-level governance could complement and enhance 
CPRs—and conversely, that appropriation rules and other features of a CPR are fragile when they are 
not recognized and integrated with external authority [4]. Carrying forward this line of thinking, the scope 
of CPR analysis was extended to encompass multiple sites and sources of governance and account for 
cross-scalar influences, including new technologies, demographic shifts, and global markets as well as 
natural hazards and ecological variability [5,6].  
In her later work, Ostrom carried forward this line of thinking by urging institutional analysts to 
move beyond management “panaceas” that result from mechanical application of CPR principles and 
recognize that CPRs were a part of complex and dynamic social-ecological systems (SESs) [1,7,8]. A SES 
framework has far-reaching implications for understanding CPRs not only because it encompasses 
additional social and ecological processes and actors, but also because it challenges core assumptions 
of stability and continuity inherent in earlier CPR work. SESs can occupy many alternative system 
states rather than a single stable state—they may be complex, discontinuous, nonlinear, and unpredictable, 
integrating human and natural phenomena across multiple spatial scales and timeframes.  
In SES thinking, the process of navigating between these shifting possibilities is captured by the 
idea of resilience. Rather than striving for the efficiency of a single optimal set of conditions or buffering 
to withstand shocks and maintain function, resiliency is about maintaining structural and functional 
complexity through periods of disturbance and reorganization [9]. Resilience includes both the possibility 
of doing the same thing faster and better and recovering to a preferred state as well as exploring and 
enabling new possibilities, reconfiguring seemingly stable natural and social conditions, and transforming 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 472 
 
 
into something new, with profoundly different characteristics [9,10]. As this implies, a system that changes 
is not necessarily a failure in resilience terms, but could be a result of an intentional effort to express a 
desirable alternative regime, or a reconfiguration to help avoid a broader system collapse.  
This focus on resilience is accompanied by an appreciation for the different ways we can think 
about disturbance events. Schoon and Cox [11] created a typology of disturbance types that includes 
flows in and out of a system, parameter fluctuations, changes in network structure, and changes in 
connectivity between the SES and external nodes or actors. A complementary way to look at disturbance is 
by considering how stress and shock act at different temporal and spatial, and organizational scales. Smith 
and Stirling [12] contrast drought as a shock with climate change as a stress, and note that while developing 
drought-tolerant maize varieties may be a good way to maintain food production in response to drought, 
consolidating the commitment to a maize-based agronomy can inhibit prospects for a more fundamental 
socio-technical transition in response to climate change. Walker et al. [13] provide a theoretical 
explanation of this relationship between shock and stress, describing how stress caused by changes in 
the slow or controlling variables of a system can promote more fluctuation in faster-moving variables 
in response to shock, which can drive a system across a threshold to another stability regime. Stress or 
shock can be either episodic or unique, although the episodic nature of longer-term stresses such as 
climate change can be beyond the capacity of local recollection and institutional adaptation. 
This latter issue raises another core attribute of disturbance, which is how it fits into people’s experience 
and how they react to it. We define surprise as an unremembered and unanticipated disturbance of any 
kind, whether stress or shock, or impact on flows, parameters, or network structure. Surprises matter, 
because they may cause a significant number of actors in a governance arrangement to question 
institutional rules and change attitudes and behaviors [14]. Their reaction can initiate social cascades or 
tipping points, as other people that these actors hold in regard are simultaneously questioning and 
changing their attitudes and behavior [15,16]. However, when disturbances are anticipated and 
remembered, they often become normalized through pre-existing agreements on how to collectively 
apportion labor and resources. Prior surprises may foster responses that may later prove useful, provided 
that there is a way to preserve organizational memory and response capacity [17,18]. No longer surprises, 
these disturbances are anticipated and incorporated into cultural patterns, in the way that Sahelian 
nomads respond to episodic droughts by taking alternative migration routes and relying on cooperative 
interethnic ties with farmers in permanent settlements [19]. 
An SES perspective builds on this understanding of how CPRs resist deformation and rapidly 
recover from episodic or precedential shocks and stress. An SES view considers how surprises can 
catalyze beneficial adaptive or even transformative change, especially in the presence of governance 
structures that provide the capacity to address the unexpected, deliberate about alternatives, and 
manage the transition [20,21]. This additional element of surprise is more attuned to the adaptive 
possibilities of an SES, beyond the dichotomy of recovery or collapse. This expands our perspective on 
resilient CPRs beyond optimizing collective solutions to free rider problems to consider how CPRs 
organize directed and purposeful responses to social and ecological surprises. In this article, we explore 
how, in addition to achieving resilience through routinized response to a typhoon or other episodic shocks, 
a resilient CPR can respond to surprise by navigating flexibly and purposively within a complex and 
dynamic system, adapting in ways that steer away from undesirable trajectories. This may involve 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 473 
 
 
enhancing a preferred system identity and function by maintaining some, but not necessarily all, 
aspects of an existing system [22]. 
The core questions that motivate this paper spring from our curiosity about the creativity and 
flexibility of CPRs within SESs. How does a CPR respond to surprises and navigate between alternative 
systems configurations? Over longer timeframes, do we observe adaptive, deliberative potential in a 
CPR, as members confront novel and unforeseen system conditions that offer the multiple possibilities 
of persistence and adaptation? In our discussion we will consider the implications for thinking about a 
CPR as a governance framework for creative reinvention in addition to its well-established ability to 
maintain effective rules, procedures, and enforcement mechanisms.  
3. Methods and Research History 
This research about Zanjera San Marcelino extends over a thirty-year period, drawn from five 
periods of research by Coward [23], Yabes, and Goldstein (1985–1986, 2006, 2009–2010 and  
2012–2015). It began with Coward’s [23] detailed analysis of the social organization of Zanjera San 
Marcelino in the late 1970s, which was based upon field observations and informant interviews. The 
second period was a 1985–1986 study by Yabes [24] that examined a national irrigation project, the 
Ilocos Norte Irrigation Project (INIP), which included a number of zanjeras within project boundaries. 
Two questions guided this research: (1) What was the impact of a large irrigation project that switched 
from engineering-based to participatory planning upon an indigenous irrigation system that operated as 
a participatory CPR? (2) How did the zanjeras’ CPR regimes change when they began participating in 
a national irrigation project? These questions were applied to 40 zanjeras, selected through a random 
stratified sample based on the variables of physical size and location with respect to NIA (National 
Irrigation Administration) dams. Semi-structured interviews were held with INIP and NIA employees 
and zanjera leaders, and a survey of farmers was conducted, both of which served as source material for 
this article. Other information used here was gathered during visits to NIA’s Central Office in Manila 
and a one-week visit to the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the Organization of 
Economic and Commercial Fund, and Sanyu, Inc., offices in Tokyo, Japan. Representatives from several 
Filipino universities also were interviewed. The data collected from these semi-structured interviews 
included the history of the physical system, history of the social and organizational structure of the 
system, current and past operation and maintenance (O&M) activities before NIA’s involvement, 
current physical and social structures in place for the zanjera after NIA came into the area with INIP, 
financial management, NIA system turnover to the zanjera, and the relationship and interaction 
between the zanjera with NIA throughout the planning and implementation activities of INIP. This 
article also draws on the more detailed analysis of Zanjera San Marcelino contained within these two 
initial periods of research, including semi-structured interviews with its officers and members, farmer 
observation, and participant observation of zanjera meetings. Organizing structure, rules of operation 
and guidelines for the selection of zanjera officers in the zanjera before and after INIP began were 
collected and analyzed, and appear in this paper. Data were primarily qualitative and were coded and 
analyzed through directed content analysis, which uses existing theory as the basis for coding ([25],  
p. 1283). Coded data were analyzed through frequency analysis, cross-tabulations, and Chi-Square 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 474 
 
 
analysis. Some questions that are included in this paper were quantitatively coded such as geographic 
location, physical size of the zanjera, and area (ha) of irrigated land before and after INIP was introduced.  
The third research period took place throughout the 1990s and 2000s, through short visits and 
correspondence. Yabes visited the Zanjera for two weeks in June 2006 to update Coward’s and her 
own research about Zanjera San Marcelino. Data included in this paper were collected primarily 
through semi-structured interviews of Zanjera San Marcelino’s officers and NIA staff, participant 
observation of the Zanjera’s meetings and activities, and interviews and collection of NIA maps and 
other documents. Yabes adapted Ostrom’s Institutional Analysis and Development coding forms, 
gathering information about location, organizational structure and process, operational level, and 
appropriation rules. Research and data collection activities by Yabes and four research assistants 
included survey questionnaires; semi-structured, short and long interviews of zanjera leaders and 
members; making or copying zanjera maps that showed the sharing of land agreements and member 
shares of water; attendance at zanjera meetings, activities and celebrations; data from the National 
Irrigation Administration (NIA), INIP and the NIA provincial office; data from Municipal Agriculture 
and Extension Offices; data from the Mayors’ Offices in Banna, Dingras, Marcos, Nueva Era, and 
Solsona; river maps from the Provincial Forestry Office; and maps and information from the 
Department of Public Works on road networks in eastern Ilocos Norte. Data were analyzed with 
descriptive statistics and the production of a map (simplified for use in this paper) that included the 
locations and names of rivers, roads, municipalities, the main and lateral canals of Zanjera San 
Marcelino, updated laws and regulations, and secondary data. Content analysis was used for data collected 
through the semi-structured interviews and the notes from zanjera and NIA activities. Updating some 
of Coward’s analysis as well as her own from 1985–1986, Yabes presented a thirty-year retrospective 
view of Zanjera San Marcelino as part of a panel of the International Association for the Study of the 
Commons in Indonesia. 
During the fourth time period, 2009–2010, Yabes used similar ethnographic methods to collect 
more information from Zanjera San Marcelino as well as the 40 zanjeras within the Ilocos National 
Irrigation System (INIS II) boundaries that were studied during 1985–1986. This information informs 
discussion of changes in irrigation law and regulation in this paper, and was used in some of the maps 
of ZSM and its geographic context. 
During the fifth period of research from 2012–2015, Yabes and Goldstein drew together select elements 
of Yabes fieldwork to focus on how Zanjera San Marcelino persisted through episodic shocks and adapted 
to surprises. The two authors regularly exchanged drafts and ideas, with Yabes selecting and structuring 
the case data and Goldstein developing a unifying theoretical framework grounded in the resilience 
literature, interpreting the case data within that framework, and drawing conclusions from this analysis. 
4. Introduction to Zanjera Irrigation 
The earliest written records of zanjeras were by Spanish priests in 1630 [26]. Zanja is the Spanish 
name for ditch, and a zanjera is a communal organization for ditch irrigation. The purpose of a zanjera 
is to secure a stable water supply and increase access to arable land, which is scarce in the Philippine 
province of Ilocos Norte [26,27]. Zanjeras governed and managed water as a common-pool resource, 
with zanjera members expected to participate in water allocation and distribution, maintenance of 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 475 
 
 
control structures, and internal deliberation and conflict management and external engagement [28]. 
Estimates of how many zanjeras existed vary widely because of different definitions of what 
organizational levels and physical boundaries constitute a zanjera. In 1978, the provincial office of 
NIA estimated 1000 to 1200 zanjeras were located in the eastern part of the province of Ilocos Norte.  
Wet season in Ilocos Norte is from mid-May to mid-October, while dry season is mid-October through  
mid-May. The main crop grown in the area is rice. Schedules and cropping patterns vary depending on 
a farmer’s choice of rice varieties, types of secondary and tertiary crops and agreements by farmers on 
cropping patterns in sub-sections within Zanjera San Marcelino. While rice is planted as early as April 
if early rains come, planting is usually around May. In late season rice is planted as a second crop with 
a few farmers planting watermelon or corn from mid-September through early January. The third crop 
from early January to April is usually corn, and often includes vegetables, tobacco or more rice. All of 
these crops during all seasons require irrigation. 
In the 1970s, zanjeras had a shared agricultural land area, a common water source, and brush dams 
and structures to control irrigation [23]. Coward outlined the three key tasks required to sustain an 
irrigation system: organization of water allocation, physical maintenance, and conflict management. 
Coward discussed five principles of organization employed to operate and maintain the zanjera system: 
(1) proportional rights and responsibilities; (2) multi-level organization; (3) combinatorial organization 
where “work groups were aggregated and disaggregated in various patterned combinations to fit 
different maintenance and operation tasks” ([23], p. 32); (4) reserve organizational capability; and (5) 
cross-cutting group membership ([23], pp. 29–33). 
Member participation in zanjera activities is organized around the atar or membership share [23]. 
The number of and size of atars is fixed at the time a zanjera is formed and does not change unless a 
zanjera physically expands. Some zanjera members earned usufruct rights to the land by helping to 
develop and maintain the irrigation system for former hacienda landowners. These members did not 
own the land that they cultivated, but they had atar because of the “biang ti daga” (sharing of land) 
agreement ([29], pp. 28–32). The number of atar shares held by each member determined proportionately 
the division of water and the rights and obligations to the land. Materials contributions and the amount of 
labor performed were also proportional to the number of atar held. The zanjeras’ principle of 
proportionality fits with Ostrom’s design principle of “proportional equivalence between benefits and 
costs” ([30], pp. 69–70). 
4.1. Zanjera San Marcelino 
While Zanjera San Marcelino’s founding date is unknown and its original articles of incorporation 
have been lost, a few of the oldest members remember that this document was written in Spanish, and 
its 2006 president speculated that the Zanjera’s Spanish name suggests the origin dates back to the 
1800s during the Spanish occupancy. Until the changes in the 1980s, described later in this narrative, 
occurred, Zanjera San Marcelino diverted water into a main canal from the Madongan River with a 
diversion dam made of poles, sticks, stones and leaves. Because of the swift flowing Madongan River, 
Zanjera San Marcelino farmers built teepee-shaped, bamboo structures named “palomar” that were 
weighed down by heavy stones and connected by a line of large bamboo poles to stand up against the 
strong current. Water from the main canal flowed for about one kilometer and then was divided into three 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 476 
 
 
lateral branches, the main/eastern, middle and western laterals, which each served several sub-sections 
called gunglos with farm ditches in the service area (Figure 1). All of the laterals, canals and farm 
ditches were earthen. 
The total area of each zanjera in Ilocos Norte varied from as small as three hectares (ha) to large 
ones with 500 ha or more. Compared to other zanjeras in Ilocos Norte, Zanjera San Marcelino was 
very large in total area, although, as with the total number of zanjeras in the province, estimates of this 
size vary. In the late 1970s, NIA estimated Zanjera San Marcelino’s size was 1500 ha of rice paddy 
during the wet season divided into 564 atars or shares [23]. However, in 2010, San Marcelino zanjera 
officers estimated its total size at 710 ha and the President said it had always been that size. Unlike 
some zanjeras, such as the Bacarra-Vintar Federation ([29], pp. 67–112), Zanjera San Marcelino did 
not share any of its water rights 1 or coordinate O&M activities with other zanjeras. While no water is 
shared between Zanjera San Marcelino with other zanjeras, downstream Zanjera San Rafael accessed 
spring water as its water source, while Zanjera Casabaan-San Carlos had access to year-round ground 
water at the surface. 
 
Figure 1. Zanjera San Marcelino map indicating main canal and lateral canals. Source: [32]. 
                                                 
1  Prior to the legalization of water rights, zanjeras had obtained water from their brush dams for their own use. In 1976, 
“the New Water Code of the Philippines allows only individuals or juridical persons to obtain rights for their use of 
water” ([29], p. 74). Under the New Water Code, water allocation is determined so that the measure and limit shall be 
beneficial. The content of water rights are the purpose of use, points of diversion, method of diversion and extraction, 
maximum amount of water, times during the year when water may be diverted, terms and conditions and annual water 
charges [31]. Water rights are not expressed in atars. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 477 
 
 
Zanjera San Marcelino was divided into 32 gunglo sub-sections. Gunglos differed in area and 
number of atar shares. In San Marcelino, atar size in gunglos ranged from 1.2 ha to 1.6 ha. Some 
gunglos were as small as 1 ha to 3 ha, while the largest gunglo was 70 ha in total area. Some zanjeras 
in other parts of Ilocos Norte had total areas that are the same sizes as San Marcelino’s gunglos.  
Gunglos were divided into two or three zones that were roughly perpendicular to the irrigation 
canals. Each zone was divided up into an equal number of parcels repeated across each zone [23,29]. 
Figure 2 is an example of a gunglo that had five members, each with one atar share. One atar share had 
one parcel of land in each of the zones so that each member had an upstream, midstream and 
downstream parcel in those gunglos with three zones. As a result, water scarcity was shared by all 
gunglo and zanjera members and the arrangement inhibits water stealing.  
 
Figure 2. Illustrative layout of fields in a gunglo unit. Source: [23]. 
Approximately 400 members worked in Zanjera San Marcelino during the 1970s. Three levels of 
organization of Zanjera San Marcelino (gunglo, lateral and zanjera) reflected the scales of work 
required by members who engaged in routine and emergency O&M tasks on the dam and canals. 
Agbuntay labor, the routine work of removing vegetation, gravel or siltation from canals, was 
performed at the lowest gunglo organizational level. Sarungkar work along the lateral area was 
routinely scheduled O&M by the zanjera leadership, who assigned labor and material requirements to 
each gunglo relative to their number of atar shares. If a small amount of labor was needed, one to two 
days of sarungkar was held, which required each gunglo to send two people for every 10 atar. When 
major construction or repairs to the main brush dam was required (Figure 3) or the Zanjera needed to 
clean long sections of the main or lateral canals, the Zanjera leadership would declare a dagup, which 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 478 
 
 
required that each atar send a member. Atars holders who did not contribute labor were required to pay 
a substantial annual fee. 
 
Figure 3. Zanjera San Marcelino farmers re-building bamboo, stone and brush dam (INIP 
Madongan Dam under construction in background). Source: Photo taken by Ruth Yabes, 1985. 
Zanjera San Marcelino maintained specific allocation rules for water sharing within and across gunglos. 
Schedules for days and times of delivery, labor assignments, water rotation, fines for water stealing 
and other transgressions aided the equitable distribution of water.  
Zanjera San Marcelino was coordinated at three levels (zanjera, lateral and gunglo), with active  
multi-scale cooperation across the Zanjera. Members were elected from the membership every four 
years and could be tenants, lessees or owner-operators. A set of officers was in place for each of the 
three levels of the Zanjera, with the gunglos at the lowest level led by a panglakayen or president, 
often a secretary and sometimes a vice-panglakayen or vice president. At the middle level, a segundo 
cabecilla was the leader of the section for one of the three lateral canals in the Zanjera. The mayor 
cabecilla (president), a secretary, sub-secretary and treasurer led at the top level of the Zanjera. Internal 
organizational activities included decision-making by majority vote, consensus on major zanjera 
decisions, or top-down decisions by leaders on minor matters. Zanjera San Marcelino held annual 
elections for officers at all three levels of organization. In recognition of the time and hard work put 
into the Zanjera by officers, members paid them an annual honorarium. 
In addition to the work rules detailed above, the Zanjera had rules for meeting attendance and materials 
contributions, conflict mediation procedures to deal with allocation conflicts within and across 
gunglos, and had the ability to fine offenders through collaborative interaction within and amongst 
gunglos and the Zanjera. Fines were charged for having a section of a gunglo canal full of dirt, plants 
and wood, doing laundry or bathing in the farm ditches, or having farm animals in the canals or 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 479 
 
 
ditches. Water stealing was the most serious offense and had the largest fine. For water stealing 
conflicts, the procedure was first to resolve the conflict at the gunglo level, address remaining disputes 
at the lateral level, and finally refer particularly intractable or serious disputes to the Zanjera San 
Marcelino president and officers and the gunglo leaders. 
4.2. Bouncing Back from Shocks: Zanjera San Marcelino through the 1970s 
One of the factors contributing to Zanjera San Marcelino’s long durability was its resilience to episodic 
shocks, especially natural disasters (typhoons), climate stressors (drought), and economic downturns:  
Typhoons: Brush dams, padilas (weirs) and ditches and canals were resilient to the flood conditions 
associated with typhoons. Although the brush dam’s bamboo structures and heavy stones were sturdy 
enough to divert water into the main canal, the materials also had the flexibility to wash out during 
severe flooding to minimize dumping excess water and gravel siltation onto arable farmlands. This 
flexibility was also advantageous if the river channel shifted since the brush dams could be re-built in 
different locations, subject to approval by zanjera members. In years with repeated typhoons, the 
Zanjera re-built its stick, stone and brush dam as many as five to ten times per year. In each case, Zanjera 
leaders and members quickly mobilized dagup (all working zanjera members) labor to re-build their 
dam and clean out gravel and silt from canals in less than ten days (Figure 3). 
Drought: The Zanjera was also highly resilient to conditions of limited or erratic water availability 
during dry season, relying on rules for scheduling water allocation and rotation. The amount of water 
delivered was determined by the area of the gunglo. The width of a gunglo’s irrigation ditch was 
proportional to the amount of water to be delivered and the area of the gunglo. The larger a gunglo was 
the wider is the gunglo irrigation ditch. When severe drought occurred, zanjera leaders directed 
gunglos to reduce proportionally the area to be irrigated. For example, if a gunglo had three zones in 
its atar system, one response was to cut water off entirely to zone three where all members had a 
partial atar share, thus sharing water scarcity. 
Economic downturns: When harvests were low or incomes were affected by adverse market conditions, 
the Zanjera would continue to function because it relied on water rotation adjustments and changes in 
the availability and amount of water allocated amongst the laterals and gunglos to affected laterals and 
gunglos; member contributions of materials (bamboo, brush, and stones); and working tools and 
collective labor. In addition, dagup work (all working members with one atar) could be scheduled that 
could provide some income redistribution within Zanjera San Marcelino, as the landowner’s group at that 
time contributed money to buy food for the workers. The Zanjera also turned to the municipal 
government for money to repair roads and bridges that provided access to their irrigation system.  
4.3. Surprise: The Ilocos Norte Irrigation Project and System 
Until the early 1980s, Zanjera San Marcelino was an independent and largely self-sufficient zanjera 
that managed its own water rights, irrigation system, labor, and O&M. This longstanding independence 
ended with the introduction of a new and powerful actor, the National Irrigation Administration (NIA), 
the driver behind the Ilocos Norte Irrigation Project (INIP) and System (INIS II). 
NIA is a public corporation created in 1964 as part of the central government’s efforts to achieve  
self-sufficiency in rice production through major irrigation construction programs, emphasizing modern 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 480 
 
 
technology and engineering. NIA served three types of irrigation systems: national, communal and 
private. NIA defined communal systems as smaller irrigation systems that served groups of farmers, 
although they did not include in this definition traditional, local or indigenous irrigation systems such as 
zanjeras that operated with little or no input from the government or outside agencies [24,28,33–35]. 
The O&M of NIA communal systems was the responsibility of irrigator associations (IAs), a legal 
body made up of the farmers who used the water and were obligated to pay fees as well as repay the 
cost of the construction ([36], p. 2).  
The impetus for NIA’s initiative in Ilocos Norte where Zanjera San Marcelino is located was  
two-fold. First, addressing low agricultural productivity by developing an integrated irrigation system 
in the area was identified as a priority by NIA’s provincial irrigation office. The second motivation for 
the project was political. President Ferdinand Marcos and his sister, provincial governor Elizabeth 
Marcos Keon, wanted NIA to dam the Quiaoit River in Ilocos Norte. This was ostensibly for flood 
control and irrigation, but a NIA staff member suggested that their real motivation was to save the 
Marcos’ family home in Batac from river flooding. After this request was deemed infeasible by NIA, 
Governor Keon asked NIA in 1977 to study other possible dams that would irrigate lands in Ilocos 
Norte, including one on the Palsiguan River. Eventually, a feasibility study and pilot project was 
initiated in partnership with the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and NIA. JICA and 
NIA drew up plans for the Ilocos Norte Irrigation Project (INIP) in two phases, which would include a 
network of irrigation and drainage canals supplied by five new diversion dams (Figures 4 and 5). Due 
to insufficient national funds, the Palsiguan Dam, Reservoir and all Phase 2 areas were not built. 
 
Figure 4. Index map of the Ilocos Norte Irrigation Project (INIP). Source: Map prepared 
by Ruth Yabes, 1990. 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 481 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Ilocos Norte Irrigation Project Map. Source: Map prepared by Ruth Yabes, 1990. 
JICA funded an initial 1000-hectare pilot project within INIP’s service area boundaries. Initially 
NIA and JICA approached the INIP pilot-project and pre-construction activities as solely an 
engineering problem of design, construction and water delivery. Once they had identified the most 
efficient solution they began to implement it by building a dam in the pilot area across the Labugaon 
River with very little consulting of the approximately eight zanjeras within the service area or taking 
into account existing zanjera canals. 
Many zanjera farmers in the INIP pilot area were angry about how NIA excluded farmers from decision 
making as well as the impact on their farmland and irrigation canals. During this time, zanjera leaders 
and membership in the pilot area held many meetings and met informally to discuss the project, and 
they agreed on a list of concerns: they had enough water without the government’s project; they did 
not want to pay the government irrigation fees; they did not want to cede their long-held, hard-earned 
water rights over to NIA; they were afraid that the right-of-ways for wider NIA canals might wipe out 
some of their smaller parcels; and they did not want to give up their zanjeras’ physical irrigation systems 
or collective management structure and be folded into one of NIA’s Irrigators Associations (IAs).  
Based on these discussions, zanjera leaders advised their membership to not sign right-of-way  
waivers or pay irrigation fees. NIA engineers responded by offering to take zanjera leaders on field 
trips to demonstrate the benefits of similar projects elsewhere. Leaders of three zanjeras were not 
swayed by this offer, and organized bulldozer blockades and other civil disobedience activities that 
brought the INIP project to a standstill. The zanjera leaders also gathered funds to send a delegation to 
the national NIA Central Office, where they met with the Chief Administrator to present their concerns.  
As a result of this campaign, NIA dropped three upstream zanjeras from the pilot area as the zanjera 
leaders had requested, and ordered a temporary stoppage of the entire project. In 1985 NIA’s Central 
Office Administrator mandated that the loss of 500 ha upstream be removed from the Pilot area, while 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 482 
 
 
adding 500 ha to the western edge of the Pilot area. INIP staff were ordered to start over and 
completely revise the project planning process [36,37].  
4.4. Adaptation: The Zanjera-NIA Hybrid 
Fortuitously, at about this time, NIA was developing a more participatory approach to developing 
communal irrigation systems. NIA management had long been troubled by farmer resistance to 
projects, as well as the difficulty in collecting irrigation fees from farmers, cost over-runs, irrigated 
service areas which were smaller than their design targets, and weak irrigation associations [37–39]. 
In 1976, ten years before, NIA began to consider alternatives to an engineering-centered approach 
that would enable joint management in partnership with strong local organizations that would enable 
farmers to plan, design and construct their own irrigation improvements ([40], p. 70; [41], p. 31).  
This approach was piloted in 1976 in two Central Luzon sites, and then expanded to 203 sites by May 
1984 ([38], p. 3). NIA involved farmers in irrigation system management in three stages. In Stage 1, 
maintenance responsibilities for sections of the major canals were contracted out on a fee basis. During 
Stage 2, NIA would share O&M responsibilities with a farmer communal association. Stage 3 called 
for a complete transfer of these responsibilities ([42], pp. 2–3). This revised approach pushed NIA staff 
to collaborate with zanjera farmers and preserve as much as possible the existing physical canal 
systems and social organization of the zanjeras.  
However, this shift was contingent on the existence of strong local organizations for NIA to partner 
with. Even with this new policy, NIA continued to have difficulties with operation, maintenance and 
fees collection because it was difficult to either find effective existing communal farmer associations 
or establish and maintain new ones. INIP’s Project Manager and staff concluded that project success 
was highly dependent on farmer participation in the project at the planning stages and throughout the 
construction and turnover process ([43], pp. 15–19).  
Informed by this experience, NIA’s Central Office Administrator mandated that INIP project office 
staff completely revise the project’s planning process in 1985 [36,37]. INIP’s planners did not have 
much difficulty implementing a more participatory approach because they were operating in area 
where there were well-established zanjeras who were already convinced that they could be part of a 
better alternative to NIA’s engineered and centralized approach. INIP planners began by designating 
the existing zanjeras as Irrigator Associations (IAs) in the INIP service area, instead of replacing 
zanjeras with IAs, which was done throughout the rest of the Philippines. The remaining canals and 
ditches to be constructed, including those in San Marcelino on the right side of the Madongan River, 
were jointly planned to some degree by the zanjeras and NIA.  
While these arrangements did not necessarily cause NIA engineers to recognize always the benefits 
of consulting with farmers or alter their engineered systems to incorporate traditional irrigation 
technologies, the development of formal institutional ties between the Zanjera and NIA led to increasing 
opportunities and willingness to collaborate ([43], pp. 15–19). For example, in the mid-1980s NIA 
engineers sought to replace Zanjera San Marcelino’s existing flow-dividing padila irrigation structure 
with concrete and steel double-gated turnouts (Figure 6). The original padila illustrated in Figure 6 
shows a farm ditch whose width was proportional to the number of atar in the gunglo, which also 
proportionally allocated water. The sangi was a concrete protection wall that prevented earth from 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 483 
 
 
eroding into the ditch and the lateral canal. The tablon stabilized turbulence in the water. The padila 
divided the water between the ditch and canal. The farm ditch was left open when it was the gunglo’s 
turn to receive water. When the water rotation went to other gunglos, wood and leaves were stuffed at the 
point of the padila to block the entrance of water in the farm ditch. Zanjera leaders asked NIA engineers 
instead to modify and improve the design of the padila rather than build double-gated turnouts [24]. 
The Zanjera’s written request was denied. After zanjera leaders and members reacted swiftly and 
angrily to this denial, the engineers responded in a familiar way—by organizing a field trip to other 
irrigation projects so Zanjera San Marcelino farmers could see how successful other double-gated 
turnouts were.  
 
Figure 6. The Existing Padila and Tablon. Source: [44]. Illustration by Patricia 
Ammerman, 1990. 
As before, this only made Zanjera opposition to the double-gated turnouts grow stronger. However, 
what happened next was different. A number of project engineers were invited to visit the area to see 
the traditional padilas in action. After these visits, many of the engineers acknowledged that the padilas 
were indeed better because they were functional, cheaper to construct, and easier to maintain and 
repair. Soon after, INIP administrators approved the Zanjera’s proposal to collaborate in making 
improvements to the padila design (Figure 7). This shift in perspective and policy traveled up the chain 
of command to NIA Central Office, which soon after issued a memo discouraging the use of double-gated 
turnouts nationwide because of the recognition that the traditional structures were a viable alternative to 
double-gated turnouts, many of which had become inoperable. Zanjera leaders, in turn, recognized  
that engineering adaptations by NIA would create technical and physical adjustments that would 
improve the padila’s performance in water delivery. NIA engineers provided improvements that 
included flashboard grooves and steel plate inserts replaced wood boards to block or open gunglo and 
lateral canals. Steel replaced the original concrete and wood tablon. Concrete walls at the beginning of 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 484 
 
 
the gunglo canal replaced earthen ones. NIA’s improvements made the padila stronger and more 
resilient to typhoons. 
 
Figure 7. Improvements to the padila and tablon by NIA and Zanjera San Marcelino 
collaboration. Source: [45]. Illustration by Patricia Ammerman, 1990. 
NIA worked with Zanjera San Marcelino to register the Zanjera with NIA and the national 
Securities and Exchange Commission, and provided training so that the Zanjera could assume 
management responsibility for the new system. Zanjera leaders quietly commented that they knew 
much of what was covered in the training regarding irrigation and the only new information was 
learning NIA terms for structures, financing and taxes.  
4.5. Political and Ecological Surprises 
The abrupt departure of President Ferdinand Marcos in February 1986 came as an unwelcome  
surprise to many people living in the province of Ilocos Norte. Marcos had always looked out for his 
allies in his home province, and had ensured a steady stream of funding for irrigation projects and 
other infrastructure [46]. This largesse dried up after he left the country, including support for a high 
reservoir dam that would have dramatically expanded INIP’s service area. In total, five NIA dams were 
built—Labugaon, Solsona, Madongan, Papa and Nueva Era—with a projected service area of 17,000 
ha. Unfortunately, NIA did not or was unable to fulfill its commitments to zanjeras in the project area 
including Zanjera San Marcelino. As of 2008, the total irrigated area shrank from 14,154 ha, to 8021 
ha in the INIP area, with approximately 2200 ha in the Madongan Right and Left areas. Due to loss of 
funds, zanjeras’ access to other waters sources, such as springs, or no water delivered, only 40 out of more 
than the original 100 plus zanjeras signed into INIP. Some additional zanjeras wanted to join the project 
but NIA had no funds to extend or build new canals in order to provide water to them. 
While construction was completed in 1991 it took another five years for the agreement to be 
finalized between NIA and the zanjeras and turn over of the project into a complete national irrigation 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 485 
 
 
system over to the NIA Regional Office [47]. In this 1996 agreement, NIA agreed to manage and 
operate the five dams and the siphons at the headworks while the zanjeras agreed to operate and 
maintain the canals and structures. The agreement also addressed how to deal with damages, requiring 
zanjeras and their members to do any earthwork of less than 100 cubic meters by themselves, while 
NIA would finance work greater than 100 cubic meters [47].  
Since Marcos left, INIP had been slashing staffing levels and support for infrastructure and canal 
improvements that had not yet started construction. From 1980–1984 funding levels and staff numbers 
were building up. During 1984–1986 there was strong funding that supported the largest staffing numbers 
during the project and as an operating irrigation system. Staff type examples ranged from engineers 
and construction workers to community organizers. From 1997–2010, due to great reductions in 
national and provincial NIA funding, NIA INIS II had bare bones staff who mostly collected levies 
from ZSM and other zanjeras and paid the dam gatekeeper. 
The impact of these cutbacks became acute after typhoons Feria in 2001 and Igme in 2004. These 
and other typhoons damaged NIA’s Madongan Dam and conduits, and caused gravel and silt to overflow 
into the canals and farmland. Zanjera San Marcelino’s water management system was rendered inoperable, 
since at this point the dams had become fully integrated into the Zanjera’s water management system.  
The Zanjera tapped into its existing organizational capacity by mobilizing its integrated, three-tiered 
labor system to use NIA equipment to perform the critical tasks of cleaning the siphon and repairing 
the headworks, which was contractually NIA’s responsibility alone. However, after these and other 
typhoons, NIA delayed making necessary repairs due to lack of funding and construction materials, 
and reduced Zanjera San Marcelino’s service area from 710 to 670 ha. A 2010 NIA chart prepared by 
ZSM leaders shows that ZSM has a total of 741.8697 ha, however, some areas are neither arable nor 
irrigated. Farmers in gunglos that are not receiving irrigation currently still pay taxes every year in the 
hope that the lands will be cleared of gravel and irrigated once again. NIA’s contribution to the 
Zanjera-NIA hybrid is to collect fees and pay NIA’s gatekeeper to open and close the gates to the right 
side of Madongan River, looking north. NIA also responded to major typhoons by building redundancy 
into the system by constructing a second emergency canal intake and an open main canal around 2005.  
The Zanjera did the rest. The members and leadership began to assume NIA responsibilities and 
build complementary infrastructure, including brush dams to divert water NIA’s main canal to irrigate 
the gunglos after the Madongan Dam and headworks were badly damaged and not repaired. In late 
2009, the Zanjera built its new form of dam with sandbags on the west side of a small spillway at the 
second emergency intake to divert more water into the main canal. Sandbags were used as needed at 
the ratio of two bags per gunglo. The failure to abide by NIA’s initial agreement of shared responsibility 
continued to exacerbate tensions and farmer non-compliance in paying fees. As of 2010, fewer than 
30% of farmers paid their annual levies to NIA, which in turn resulted in insufficient resources to 
repair damaged infrastructure, further discouraging farmers from paying the fee. However, the 
Zanjera’s use of sandbags, O&M of the main and lateral canals, and other infrastructure made up for 
the loss of irrigation water from NIA. 
The Zanjera members’ priority was to still pay honorariums to Zanjera and gunglo officials, first, 
and then paying reduced fees to NIA. In the attempt to collect as much money as possible, however, NIA 
collects its fees a few days before the Zanjera officers are paid.  
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 486 
 
 
Other issues arose during the same time period that may have had a more disruptive impact on 
Zanjera San Marcelino. In 2010, the president of the Zanjera noted that since the Madongan Dam was 
completed there was a growing “free rider” problem where some members did not work or pay fines. 
Possible reasons he provided were an aging membership, economic diversification that diminished their 
availability, and disruptions related to land inheritance, as well as agrarian reform, which increased the 
difficulties of coordination after many tenant farmers became landowners. As this suggests, while 
these threats are driven by seemingly positive developments institutionally far removed from the 
Zanjera, they could have an impact on the Zanjera that may be more damaging than a typhoon. For 
example, driven by concerns over gender and sibling equity, changes in Filipino national inheritance 
law require equitable land division for descendants [48]. If this leads families to split up atar parcels, 
this can interfere with the way the zone system reinforces common interests. For instance, a father may 
own one atar share split into three parcels in three zones. When he dies, if he has six children, each is 
entitled to one half of one of the three parcels in a zone. Family disagreements and failure to make 
arrangements to avoid splitting the land into tiny sections may result in land fragmentation, undermining 
the original land patterns of atar shares and the related rights and responsibilities, and altering the three 
zone atar arrangement, thus breaking the internal physical check that discouraged upstream zone 
cultivators from stealing water from the lowest zone farmers. Of 36 gunglos in ZSM in an area of  
740 ha, nine have intact atars (in hectares), 25 have parcels that are split from a tenth to a thousandth 
of a hectare. Two other gunglos show one atar in hectares split three ways. 
In response to problems like these that many zanjeras were facing, a federated, provincial 
association of zanjeras in National Systems was created in 2010 in Ilocos Norte province called the 
National System’s Federation-Ilocos Service Associations Group. This association provided support 
for Zanjera San Marcelino through forums for information sharing and collaborative learning amongst 
zanjeras, their leaders and members. 
This entire historical timeline is summarized in Table 1. 
Table 1. Timeline highlighting episodic shocks and surprises to Zanjera San Marcelino 
(ZSM) and responses. 
Dates Episodic Shocks and Surprises Responses 
Pre-1970s to 
early 1980s 
Typhoons 
Bamboo, log and stone diversion dam wash away 
during flooding, protecting farmland, and all work 
units mobilized for repairs 
Drought Rotational irrigation modified during drought 
Economic fluctuations 
Flexibility in member contributions and allocations 
in response to economic conditions. 
1983–1985 
Construction begins on National 
Irrigation Agency (NIA) dams that 
would supersede zanjera system 
Some other zanjeras resist and refuse to sign  
over their water rights and join government 
irrigation associations. 
NIA adopts more collaborative approach 
Mid-1980’s 
NIA engineers propose turnouts that 
ignore ZSM’s padila technology 
Engineer/farmer field visits lead to retention of padilas 
  
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 487 
 
 
Table 1. Cont. 
Dates Episodic Shocks and Surprises Responses 
1986–2000 
After President Marcos flees 
country, construction, operation and 
maintenance funding dry up 
Realignment of management responsibility: NIA 
maintains dams and major infrastructure and ZSM 
maintains canals. 
2001–2004 
Typhoons caused damage to the 
dams, headworks and canals and 
flood farmland with gravel 
ZSM mobilizes its integrated three-tier labor 
system, borrows NIA equipment, pays for fuel to 
make repairs, cleans headworks and canals, agrees 
to maintain headworks and main canal 
2010 
NIA fails to maintain agreement 
with ZSM to maintain the dam, 
headworks and main canal 
ZSM farmers pay little or no irrigation fees to NIA 
2010 onwards 
Many ZSM members do not do their 
share of work or pay fines 
None 
2005–2010 
onwards 
Filipino inheritance laws requires 
sibling equity in land division 
Atar parcels split up into smaller parcels 
2009-onwards 
Organization of province-wide 
zanjera learning network 
Information sharing and interaction among  
zanjera leadership 
5. Discussion: Episodic Shock, Surprise, and Resilience 
5.1. Introduction 
Looking over this three decade long Zanjera San Marcelino case study, a broader perspective on 
institutional persistence and adaptation emerges that has telling implications for our thinking about 
resilient, community-based resource management. Over this period of observation there were repeated 
episodic shocks, as well as stress and surprises that were outside of the experience of Zanjera members 
and leadership. In the following discussion, we will highlight some of these social and ecological 
disturbances and the different response strategies the Zanjera pursued. After episodic shocks, including 
droughts and typhoons, Zanjera San Marcelino quickly set into motion established procedures that spread 
the burden equitably and facilitated rapid recovery of its water delivery system. When potentially 
devastating surprises occurred, the Zanjera responded nimbly and creatively, deploying a variety of 
strategies over the spectrum from resistance to accommodation, sometimes forging new collaborative 
partnerships, and other times withdrawing from these relationships when the partnerships brought on 
new surprises. We link this ability to both persist and adapt to Zanjera San Marcelino’s collaborative 
governance structure, adopting a social-ecological systems (SES) perspective that integrates concern 
with the rules and procedures that enable periodic recovery with the capacity to adapt institutions in 
response to dynamic and uncertain conditions. We end the discussion by describing how seemingly 
benign recent stresses are threatening to unravel the Zanjera’s ability to continue to respond to ongoing 
shock and surprises.  
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 488 
 
 
5.2. CPRs Bounce Back from Shock 
At the beginning of this thirty-year study in the late 1970s, Zanjera San Marcelino had the 
hallmarks of a classic common property resource regime ([23]; [30], pp. 67–79). Members shared an 
agricultural land area and common water source, and allocated proportional rights to irrigation 
structures in a way that created a common interest in maintaining irrigation capacity. Relying on a 
multi-tiered governance structure run by a member-elected leadership, the Zanjera organized water 
allocation and physical maintenance, and maintained a permanent enforcement and conflict management 
capacity, with multiple opportunities for appeal to higher administrative levels of the Zanjera. 
Effective recovery after episodic shocks, including economic downturns and typhoons, was enabled by 
established rules and procedures and the institutional capacity to activate reserve capacity in different 
patterned combinations depending on need. Zanjera San Marcelino was resilient in the sense of 
Holling’s ([49], p. 14) original definition of resilience as “a measure of the persistence of systems and 
of their ability to absorb change and disturbance and still maintain the same relationships between 
populations or state variables”. This is resilience as “bouncing back” from a disturbance that threatens 
the integrity of a well-bounded community by recovering structure and function. 
5.3. SES’s Adapt to Surprise 
Beginning in the 1980s, Zanjera San Marcelino’s provision of irrigation services to its membership 
was threatened by the intervention of an institutional actor that they had no previous experience with, 
the National Irrigation Administration (NIA). At first leadership from pilot area zanjeras organized an 
effective resistance to NIA’s efforts to integrate farmers into a nationally planned and engineered irrigation 
system. Zanjera San Marcelino’s leadership had similar concerns, and then switched to a cooperative 
stance after observing that NIA adopted a more collaborative approach in other project areas. A particularly 
pivotal moment occurred when Zanjera San Marcelino’s farmers joined NIA’s engineers in field 
demonstrations of the effectiveness of traditional padilas over proposed double-gated turnouts. Over 
time the Zanjera and NIA developed closer collaborative relationships and mutual understandings that 
led to incorporation of NIA’s engineered elements into the Zanjera’s irrigation system, agreements to 
take delivery of water from the new dams in exchange for fees and labor commitments, and inclusion 
of Zanjera San Marcelino in the Madongan River Federated Irrigators’ Association. Zanjera San 
Marcelino’s irrigation system became neither wholly traditional and self-governed nor solely 
engineered and centrally governed, but rather a hybrid of both. 
We understand this accommodation and mutual incorporation of NIA and Zanjera San Marcelino’s 
irrigation systems as a resilient response to a potentially disruptive surprise—which is very different 
than bouncing back from episodic shocks. In this case, faced with an unprecedented situation, the 
Zanjera resisted changes imposed from outside and then embraced changes that their membership 
contributed to designing, such as the improved padila described above. Instead of resilience as recovery, 
this is resilience as adaptive capacity, the ability to cope with surprises while retaining critical 
functions, structures and feedback mechanisms [9,50].  
The concept of adaptive capacity is grounded in a definition of adaptation as “…an adjustment in 
ecological, social, or economic systems in response to observed or expected changes in environmental 
Soc. Sci. 2015, 4 489 
 
 
stimuli and their effects and impacts in order to alleviate adverse impacts of change” ([51], p. 398). 
Adaptive capacity is the ability to engage with uncertainty and surprise by exploring multiple possible 
alternative directions and outcomes, and experimenting with how best to proceed. It is about conscious 
analysis, planning and design, which could either involve coping and managing to retain a desired state 
or altering institutional or ecological arrangements to create a preferred system operating space. 
Crucially, this relies less on the timely application of pre-existing rules or procedures to “bounce back” 
and more on the exercise of agency and intentionality to identify community desires and preferences. 
This discovery process requires critical thinking to identify the root causes of conflict and understand 
underlying power relations that shape constraints and the conditions of possibility in a given moment [52].  
It is remarkable that Zanjera San Marcelino can express both of these approaches to resilience, one 
based on the application of rules to recover from episodic shocks and avoid undesirable thresholds of 
change, the other on the capacity to generate novel alternatives and mobilize the resources required to 
adapt to surprise, such as taking over maintenance of the dam and headworks. Organizations that have 
the capacity to apply rules and standard operating procedures generally are not good at innovation, and are 
sometimes notoriously sclerotic when facing new and unprecedented challenges to their existence—the 
classic example being natural resource organizations like the US Forest Service, which for decades 
continued to focus on fire suppression despite the rising costs and ecological harm from putting every 
fire out [52]. Codified procedures, rules in practice and channelized behaviors that can enable quick 
recovery from episodic stress like wildfire may hinder the flexibility to experiment and develop new 
alternatives [53–55]. 
Zanjera San Marcelino’s ability to respond to shocks and surprises may be grounded in the way it is 
organized and governed. Many of the same qualities that are described in well-functioning CPRs that 
bounce back after shocks [1] are also identified by resilience scholars as the basis for creativity and 
purposeful experimentation after surprises, including: 
• A connection to place and dense social networks with ample trust and social capital [56]; 
• Strong collective choice processes that reflect embedded, shared values [55,57]; and 
• High levels of participation and the ability to engage actors in collaborative interaction [58,59]. 
The same institutional qualities that enabled the Zanjera to persist so long can be associated with its 
ability to adapt to new circumstances. However, one institutional feature often associated with adaptive 
capacity that is not characteristic of CPRs is connectivity across scale through polycentric governance. 
While CPRs are defined as relatively bounded, discrete, and self-sufficient, social-ecological systems 
are characterized as panarchical [60], with