Indigenous Knowledge for Resilience and Adaptation in Pastoral Production System of Somali Regional State in Ethiopia

Interdisciplinary Description of Complex Systems 17(4), 723-737, 2019 
 
*Corresponding author, : yemusa@yahoo.com; +251 918 71 64 73; 
*Institute of Disaster Risk Management and Food Security Studies, Bahir Dar University, P.O. Box 5501, 
*6000 Bahir Dar, Ethiopia 
* 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE FOR RESILIENCE AND 
ADAPTATION IN PASTORAL PRODUCTION SYSTEM 
OF SOMALI REGIONAL STATE IN ETHIOPIA 
Mossa Endris Ahmed1, * and Mohammed Ahmed Bihi2 
1Bahir Dar University 
1Bahir Dar, Ethiopia 
2Independent Consultant 
2Jigjiga, Ethiopia 
DOI: 10.7906/indecs.17.4.4 
Regular article 
Received: 30 July 2018. 
Accepted: 24 December 2019. 
ABSTRACT 
The study attempts to highlight the importance and opportunities of indigenous knowledge for 
resilience and adaptation of the pastoral production system in the Sheygosh woreda of Somali region 
of Ethiopia. The study used data from primary and secondary sources. The primary data collected 
through key informants, focus group discussions, observations, ranking, and life history. The study 
highlights the fact that indigenous knowledge for resilience and adaptation contributes to reducing of 
vulnerability results from climate variability and also plays a critical role in adaptation, mitigation and 
coping with hazards and shocks in the past time. However, due to recurrent hazards and prolonged 
shocks and climate change, the use of traditional knowledge of coping mechanisms are under 
tremendous threats and will not be viable and sustainable in the coming years. In conclusion, the 
indigenous knowledge in the pastoral community deserves to recognize and support in view of their 
coping with, adapting to and withstand to hazard and climate chance. Thus, it needs to integrate in 
policies of the country. 
KEY WORDS 
indigenous knowledge, resilience, adaptation, pastoral, production system, Ethiopia 
CLASSIFICATION 
JEL: Q15, Q56, R14 
M.E. Ahmed and M.A. Bihi 
724 
BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION 
Pastoralism system is and has been practiced in many regions of the world for centuries [1], 
and plays a significant role in conserving of natural and environmental capital [2]. According 
to [3], it is widely accepted that livestock production system is a rational economic enterprise 
in the pastoral communities. 
Worldwide, pastoralism supports about 200 million households and herds of nearly about a 
billion head of animals such as goats, cattle and camels [4] and occupies a quarter of the 
world’s land area which is predominantly arid and semi-arid lands and supports millions of 
pastoral households in which 60 % are living in Africa [5, 6]. 
According to CSA projection population [7], Ethiopia is the second most populous country in 
Africa, and one of the continent’s largest areas. Ethiopia has the largest livestock population 
in Africa [8, 9]. Based on livestock and livestock characteristics assessment carried out by 
CSA in mid-2014/2015, this sector substantially has been contributing the economic 
development of the country in both products and by-products forms. According to Mulu [10], 
pastoral areas in Ethiopia covers more than 62 % of the country’s land mass. As S. Desta [6] 
pointed out, that means that two thirds of the land mass of the country support 12-15 % of the 
country’s human population. However, this area with livelihood system has been faced a 
continuous drought, conflict and famine for the last decades [11]. 
In this regard, the Ethiopian government has initiated several developmental projects in the 
pastoral areas to address pastoral problems which adversely effects on growth and economic 
development of the country. These projects include Pastoral Forum of Ethiopia (PFE) et al. [12], 
South East Rangeland Project (SERP), Pastoral Pilot Project, Pastoral safety net Programme 
(PSNP), Pastoral community Development Project (PCDP) and others implemented by NGO’s 
such as Pastoral Livelihoods Initiative (PLI) I and II, Revitalizing Agricultural/Pastoral 
Incomes and New Markets (RAIN), Pastoralists Areas Resilience Improvement through 
Market Expansion (PRIMA) and so on were directly concentrated on two key pillars of 
disaster risk reduction fundamentals, namely minimizing of vulnerability of pastoral communities 
and maximizing of resilience and adaptive capacity to hazards and climate variability. 
Despite enormous efforts exerted towards improving the pastoral livelihoods as a vital system in 
the drylands of Africa in general and particular in Ethiopia, the outcomes of these program/projects 
as Hogg [13], pointed out was insignificant and little have done to increase livestock 
production and productivity or to change the quality standard of pastoral peoples. Several 
reasons have been pinpointed for this poor performance, include neglecting of the indigenous 
knowledge, socio-cultural and ecological aspects of the pastoralist, ignoring of indigenous 
social structure and low level of participation of local knowledge in their design [13, 14]. 
Nevertheless, it is time to invest in pastoral production system reasonable manner – in terms 
of research, and financial – in order to reduce vulnerability to hazards, climate variability and 
other external human-induced disasters, and to enable the pastoral production system to be a 
more productive system and sustainable livelihood. The study, thus, examines indigenous 
knowledge and its role in building of risk minimization strategies. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK OF THE STUDY 
The conceptual framework is the system of collective concepts, assumptions, expectations, 
beliefs, and theories that support and guide the research goals and it can be a graphic or in 
narrative form. Based on that, the conceptual framework of this study is based on the ideas of 
resilience and adaptation theory with additional input from Sustainable Livelihood Approach, 
Indigenous knowledge for resilience and adaptation in pastoral production system of Somali … 
725 
as Figure 1 shows. The ongoing discussion on climate changes and hazards of the pastoral 
traditional system is also considered. Therefore, the conceptual framework of the study 
attempts to connect to all aspects of inquiry include problem and questions, purpose, 
literature review, methodology, data collection and analysis. 
The conceptual framework indicates that the pastoral traditional system has characteristics 
and opportunities for the sustained livelihood in their livelihood system, including resilience, 
adaptive capacity to hazards and coping mechanism with their environment. At the same time 
there are internal and external threats to the persistent of pastoral production system. These 
factors are mainly vulnerability factors and risks elements of the pastoral production system, 
notably social network aspects and social protection supports, economic and political 
dimensions, and ecosystem and environments. 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual framework of the study. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY AREA 
The Somali Regional State (SRS) is one of the nine regional states of the Federal Democratic 
Republic of Ethiopia (FDRE). Geographically, SRS is the second largest in the country. It 
covers a total area of 350 000 km
2
. According to the last Population and Housing Censuses in 
2007, the regions’ population is estimated about 4 439 147 million [9]. In 2013 an unofficial 
projected population census produced by regional Bureau of Finance and Economic 
Development (BoFED), the population of the region is projected about 5,3 million. The 
region has 9 administrative zones which encompass up to 68 districts and four administrative 
towns or councils and more than 780 centres/kebeles [14]. It borders Djibouti to the north; 
Somalia to the east and northeast; Kenya to the south; Oromiya Region to the west and Afar 
Region in the north-west, Figure 2. 
METHODS OF DATA COLLECTING 
The study attempts to employ one of the most effective methods for information gathering 
from the community those deemed to have enough knowledge about what the study attempts 
M.E. Ahmed and M.A. Bihi 
726 
to address. The method for data collection includes a gender responsive participatory 
approach based on the understanding that men and women have different indigenous 
knowledge regarding to their locality context. The study used primary data collection such as 
3 Focus Group Discussion; 4 Key informant interviews including government staffs, and 
women and youth offices and direct observation. Also the study used secondary data 
collection, such as, from available documents, books, journals, official reports, e-books and 
all possible knowledge sources and hubs. 
Figure 2. Map of the study area [14]. 
DATA SAMPLING TECHNIQUES 
The study uses qualitative methods to answer the questions of the study pertinent to what, 
why and how, in understanding of human behaviour, opinions and experiences, they have or 
practiced in his environment. Sampling selection of the study uses is a purposive sampling 
method. The rationale behind or using this method is to interview a knowledgeable and 
competent traditional elder who have the required criteria according the study approach. 
Therefore, the case study was conducted in purposively selected Sheygosh woreda and four 
kebeles namely, Raad dooyo, maro-guduudsi, kebele 10 and kebele 02 from Sheygosh 
woreda. The woreda is predominantly pastoralist, but due to recurrent hazards the woreda 
has recently become agro-pastoralist livelihood. 
In this case, the study systematically employs a number of techniques including Participatory 
Rural Appraisal (PRA), because the growth of PRA as a technique has seen a proliferation in 
social research of its application and use. 
METHODS OF DATA ANALYSIS 
Data analysis and process starts by understanding and describing the overall situation. In 
order to analyse the data collected from field appropriate methods, instruments and 
procedures used. A qualitative data analysis method used to analyse the data. From the 
Indigenous knowledge for resilience and adaptation in pastoral production system of Somali … 
727 
qualitative data analysis methods thematic and content based techniques also used. Finally, 
all data obtained from documents, interviews and questionnaires triangulated in order to 
properly answer the essential research questions and postulates proposed by the study. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
PASTORAL PRODUCTION SYSTEM IN SHEYGOSH WOREDA 
Pastoralist production system everywhere on the earth their live heavily derive from livestock 
products and by-products by consumption or by sales [15]. In Ethiopia, livestock production 
is the main source and asset of the income for pastoralists and agro-pastoralists, also the 
sector considerably contribute to the country’s GDP [16, 17]. 
Somali Region has the largest area and the most population of Ethiopia’s dry land pastoral 
area [18]. Livestock production sales constitutes up to 50 % or more of all their income. 
Population of the region is categorized into a pastoralist which is majority, agro-pastoralists, 
pure farmers, and about 14 % of urban population [19]. The region has about 17 food economy 
zones or livelihoods system. Among of these, eight are categorized as a pure pastoralist, 
whereas six are agro-pastoralist and only three are pure agricultural [18]. Livelihood based-
livestock rearing is the dominant way of life of Somali region pastoralist. Livestock 
production system is the mainstay of pastoralists’ livelihoods throughout the region. 
Pastoralists of the Somali regional locate in dry land and harsh environment characterized by 
water shortage and pasture due to recurrent droughts, land degradation, other human-induced 
shocks. In turn, the pastoralist production system in the region becomes increasingly vulnerable to 
hazards and gradually loses its resilient and adaptive capacity of the traditional pastoral system. 
The livelihood transforming has triggered the trend of hazards and shocks in the woreda, 
which generates a number of unwilling options of livelihoods. The livelihood systems in 
which people in the woreda depend as group discussants confirmed are traditional pastoral 
production system, agro-pastoralist, petty trades, daily labour and others (temporary work). 
The pastoralist in the woreda depends on two types of livestock production. First type 
comprises products and by-products such as milk, meat, cheese, and butter supply to the local 
market on weekly or daily basis. The second type is livestock itself; sale animals, hides and 
skin through local market on a need basis. 
According to the agro-pastoralists or semi-sedentary, they derive their livelihood from animal 
products and by-products (at low level) and partially from farming system which is rain-fed 
system. However, as Figure 3 indicates, about 75 % of the majority people of Sheygosh 
woreda depend on livestock production system, while sizeable numbers 15 % of population is 
agro-pastoralist. About 10 % are deriving their income through daily labour, such as 
construction activities, donkey cart and other daily activities. The majority of this group are 
ex-pastoralists or drop-out pastoralists, those who lost their assets and property and 
subsequently migrated to the villages and towns. Only 2 % are engaging in trade and business 
related activities, such as food staple, clothes, normal shopping, restaurant, chat and other 
private activities, while 3 % work in temporary and occasional opportunities including trees 
cutting and wood collection, charcoal burning etc. 
CHALLENGES OF PASTORAL PRODUCTION SYSTEM 
Pastoral production was an oldest livelihood and overriding system which Somali community 
depends on it a long period of time. As focus group discussants confirmed, this system was 
traditionally strong and manageable and people were genuinely proud for being pastoralists. 
However, currently the traditional pastoral system practicing is declining and gradually losing 
M.E. Ahmed and M.A. Bihi 
728 
 
Figure 3. Livelihood types and income sources. Source: Focus Group Discussions. 
its cherished possession. Several reasons attributed by community to the underlining causes 
of decreasing of practicing of pastoral production system. The main roots of challenges is 
summarised further in the text. 
Recurring Drought: Drought in the pastoral area is a climatic-phenomenon. According to 
key informants and experts, the drought trend of severity and frequency is doubled recent 
years. As a result, drought has adversely affected on the pastoralist production system by 
disrupting income source, trade and value chain, social structure network and valued norms, 
ecosystem and natural resources and overall of livestock production and by-products. A 
number of studies conducted showed the significant impact of drought on the livestock 
production system in lowland. Their findings revealed that during drought livestock 
population and production had decreased dramatically (Fasil et al. as cited in [20]). 
Disclose new alternative of livelihoods: Somali pastoralists dating were professionally 
practicing the pastoral system dating back thousands of years. This system was the dominant 
livelihood in region’s inhabitant. However, the respondents observed that due to the recurrent 
and prolonged hazards people attempt to look for another livelihood option which is better 
and more sustained rather than fragile pastoral system. Among of them had introduced a 
mixed system namely, agro-pastoralist, petty trade and other activities. All these new 
alternative activities reduced partially pure pastoral production system. 
Better education for children: The number size of pastoralist family is a considerable 
important, even in some parts the big family is considered as a part of wealth characteristics. 
Although the pastoralists have an old system of learning of children for Koranic education 
and other Islamic teachings duksis, which is based on mobile schools, but when government 
has introduced informal and formal education in the pastoral areas such as alternative basic 
education (ABE) and mobile education, it has changed their perception toward the role of 
education. Based on that, pastoralist households those have sizeable number of children, 
splits into two; some of them send to their relatives in towns in order to obtain formal 
education, and some of them remain with family to care take animals. 
70% 
15% 
2% 
10% 
3% 
Pastoralist Agro-pastoralist Trade and small
business
Daily labor Others
Livelihood types and income sources  
Indigenous knowledge for resilience and adaptation in pastoral production system of Somali … 
729 
Restriction of movement and mobility: The most important mechanism of pastoralists is the 
mobility both during dry and rain seasons. The mobility meant to the pastoral context a 
search of pasture and adequate water for their animals and trade and food supply for human. 
However, any restriction action and limitation of pastoralists’ movement is heavily 
paralyzing of their livelihood and food security. The major restrictions that pastoralist 
complaint includes, livestock trade cross border, which government labelled an illegal trade 
or contraband action, rangeland degradation by the name of exploration /investments, 
increased sedentarisation due to proliferation and investing of huge dams and water 
catchments in rangelands and security restriction. All these factors and others not mentioned 
here have triggered the weakness of the pastoral production system. 
Migration from rural to urban area: Migration from rural is a new phenomenon relatively 
in the pastoral area. This phenomenon span is about a decade. Many factors underlining the 
migration include, looking a better life, distraction, security aspects, family conflicts etc. 
However, the majority of these migrants is young generation and is considered the mainstay 
of households. The migration of this category of generation is indication of desperation and 
the beginning of the end of collapsing of pastoralist household structure. 
Low basic service delivery and social protection: The frequent drought and shocks in the 
pastoral areas forced to the pastoralists to be a more reliant on government and NGO supports. 
However, although many basic services and social protection projects and programs have 
been implemented in a vast area of pastoralist localities, still the pastoralists claims more to 
do in safeguarding of their assets and livelihoods in the face of the climate variability. 
Moderation and change of mindsets: Though the pastoral production system is an old 
livelihood system based on strong values and traditional norms, but many pastoralists start to 
change their attitude towards this livelihood system, thinking that pastoralists is a backward 
system not compatible with the new life and the sophisticated civilization. Eventually, they 
categorized the pastoralists’ community as a backwardness society. And they believe pastoral 
production system is taboo issue and people exclude them from the existence. 
Increase of bad habits which are an exotic in Somalis pastoralist values and norms: The 
proximity between urban and rural communities generates a number of interactions and 
sharing of values, whether it is a bad habit or a good conduct. It was observed that many male 
pastoralists (at all levels) chew Khat (Catha edulis) and smoke cigarettes. These two habits 
were unusual in the pastoralist communities. However, practicing these bad habits on a daily 
basis (addictions) has negative consequences and rapidly deteriorates the household incomes and 
their assets, creating in many situations the social problems in families, such as a breakdown. 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE FOR RESILIENCE AND ADAPTATION 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE OF RESILIENCE 
Resilience in the new paradigm of disaster risk reduction is defined as the capacity of a 
community, society or system to resist potentially to hazards in order to pursue the existing 
functioning or to maintain an acceptable level of new functioning and structure [21]. 
However, according to the group discussion, the resilience-locally refers to adkeysi opposite 
of vulnerability nugul – for the pastoralist means the ability to resist and to recover from 
hazards and risks occur in their locality. This resilience traditionally is classified into four 
main categories, the first resilience of human/herder, the second resilience of the pastoral 
community social network, third resilience of livestock, and the fourth resilience of 
ecosystem/habitat. 
M.E. Ahmed and M.A. Bihi 
730 
RESILIENCE OF PASTORALIST/HERDER 
Broadly speaking, for the long time, the pastoralists were strong enough Lihiin and capable to 
adapt to all tough conditions. Despite, the hunger and thirst, at the same time they are proud 
of their tedious and tiresome work under hard circumstance. They used to exercise their 
routine activities, such as caring animals, movement, watering livestock, cutting trees for 
making home equipment and accessories, meetings with elders for information sharing and 
exchange news on situation and other necessary activities. Another hand pastoralists /herders 
have high self-assurance and enjoy complete freedom and independence without any stress. 
Regarding Table 1, the discussants have attributed to that the pastoralists at the previous time 
used to drink the fresh milk and eating animal meats. Also, in their habitat has a plenty of 
vegetation dihin suitable for eating with high ingredients of nutrient, fibre and many types of 
vitamins, which called loosely Qadhabsi. In addition to that they have fresh air and clean 
atmosphere. Result of these positive composition, pastoralist were more healthy, more strong, 
more resistant to the harsh environment and less strain from external difficulties. 
However, nowadays unfortunately, fitness of the pastoralists for exercising their 
responsibility toward household and livestock is dramatically fading. There are determinant 
factors for deterioration of the condition to that level, such as recurrent droughts, prolonged 
shocks and risks and climate variability, the rangeland and forest areas is disappearing and 
vegetation is shrinking in vast areas of the region. All these combinations result the 
decreasing of livestock production and by-products, also. This in turn, the physical and 
mental power of pastoralists adversely has affected. Similarly, pastoralist/herder does not eat 
adequate food that contains sufficient nutrients. Other political, social and economic elements 
are associated with the abovementioned factors. 
It is important to note here that there is a considerable number of pastoralists practicing some 
harmful habits which has a negative impact on their health and social interactions, notably the 
chewing of Khat and smoking. 
Table 1. Resilience characteristics of pastoralist/herder. Sources: Focus Group Discussions 
and Key informant interviews. 
Characteristic Detail activities 
Dynamism They have ability to achieve in a day a number of activities in different 
areas without rest. The main activities they used to exercise such as caring 
animals, movement or travelling for purchasing stable food, watering 
livestock, cutting trees for making home equipment and accessories, 
meetings with elders for information sharing and exchange news on 
situation and other necessary activities. 
Durability They may walk tens or hundreds of km under harsh climate, rough and 
roadless, with little of drinking water and food, in order to accomplish a 
specific task, for instance, when a herder man travels long distances in 
search of grazing place or water or lost animals or for other reasons. 
Desirability They do their responsible independently with high eagerness, with less 
control and pressure from outside. Additional to their daily routine, they 
like to be in frontline voluntarily to participate in all social support 
activities, for example, in a meeting for sensitive issues, solving of 
conflicts, collecting of supports for needy people and so on. 
Knowledgeable Pastoralists/herders have knowledge and skills through practical 
experiences in their environment. They know name of vegetation, terrain, 
landscape and habitat, type of soil, type of salt, livestock species and 
diversity, seasonal calendar, weather predicating, traditional healing both 
human and livestock and so on. 
Indigenous knowledge for resilience and adaptation in pastoral production system of Somali … 
731 
RESILIENCE OF SOCIAL STRUCTURE 
Somali society is well-known for its strong social network and relationship. This system is 
rooted on Islamic principal teaching and old Somali traditional of social structure. The social 
network system functions in different ranges and has several pillars. Some of them are 
compulsory, others are socially mandated, and some are individual voluntary-based. The 
social network considerably contributes building of social capacity, minimizing of 
vulnerability, sustaining of recovery as well maintaining of social existence. However, the 
main aim behind this social mechanism support is to promote social relationship, social 
protection, reduce poverty and vulnerability and to increase social equality. As a group 
discussants revealed, the main pillars of social structure of Somali pastoral community one 
can categorize in three sections, as described further in this text. 
Section one: Compulsory 
Zakat is a form of Islamic social financing system through which required from all better off 
to provide a certain amount of their wealth or assets (money or livestock or seed crop) to the 
people in need based on Sharia requirements. This both rural and urban is required equally. 
This form of social support performs a great in terms of supporting destitute people and gives 
them a mechanism to govern and recover newly on their livelihood after hazards or shocks. 
Section two: Socially mandated 
This section of social support network mostly practices in rural communities. The system is 
based on social or society obligation between community parts in a certain area. This can be a 
clan based form, or locality based form or other forms of agreement xeer which agreed by a 
specific community. Mainly, this system is not a long time social support system rather than a 
one-off disposal support, in order to reduce vulnerability and increase of resilience of the 
needy households. The most acknowledged types of this system are as follows. 
Qaadhaan (risk pooling) this system of social network, is used when membership of 
community commits an action like killing to someone whether it is deliberately (ula-kac) or 
not deliberately (kama). In this case, the community automatically paying the dia which is a 
certain amount or livestock (mostly camels) according to Somali customary law (xeer) as a 
compensation of the action. Traditionally, 100 camels must be paid if the victim is male and 
50 camels if the victim is female. The terms of the payment type and time and how to collect 
depend on relationship ties between the paying clan or group. 
Xoolo-geyn (unconditioned free gift) is a type of social support network based on free gift. 
Whenever a member of community experiences sudden shock or loss of livestock or asset, 
the elders or leaders collect livestock from community and provide with it the destitute cayd 
who lost all animals or assets. 
Dhowrto (surplus milk stored): This type of social support is more pro-active and 
preparedness. The system aims to collect and store the surplus milk in the better time in order 
to distribute the pro-poor families with no milking animals in the dry season. 
Section three: individual voluntary based 
Broadly, this section of social support network is based on personal willingness without any 
pressure from social authority. This type is merely more clan kinship and relative connection 
basis. 
Maalsin or irmansi (temporary loan). This is to provide a member of your kinship to 
lactating animals (cattle or goats) in a loan basis for a period of time. Usually the agreement 
M.E. Ahmed and M.A. Bihi 
732 
is between two individuals. The animals will return when the condition of borrower changes to 
better or livestock gives birth. Sadaqah (almsgiving) is given to all people in need, kinship or 
not. This can be a form of money, livestock, kind or whatever has a value to the needy 
person. Obviously, this type of alms giving is unlimited in terms of quantity and the timeframe. 
Qowsaar or Raci (livestock care). Poor households arrange their younger or children men 
during hardship time to look for or herd the better off households to their livestock in order to 
get food and other benefits as a payment. Based on focus group discussion and key 
informants, all these religious donations and cultural network supports are common and still 
practices in the Sheygosh woreda particularly in the pastoral community. Unfortunately, with 
recurrent droughts, calamities, shocks and other associated factors those triggered 
vulnerability of the pastoral community, the social reciprocal system is increasingly declining 
and less unfeasible specifically social and individual based, as certain groups may become 
more disadvantaged than others. 
Resilience of livestock. Livestock is the mainstay of pastoralists’ livelihood dating back to 
thousands of years. Based on that, livestock has given highly consideration and priority, in 
terms of caring, searching for apt grazing, watering, salting, inspecting from diseases by 
providing drugs, looking for apt grazing and rangeland and so on. Therefore, livestock 
resilience to diseases, heat, walking to a long distance, interval period for watering and more 
others were extremely amazing. 
The mechanisms and strategies for increasing livestock resilience practice by the pastoral 
community in Sheygosh specifically and the Somali pastoralists in general are more than to 
summarize in these pages. However, the pastoral indigenous knowledge in resilience and 
adaptation (environment, biodiversity, rangeland and vegetation) is priceless knowledge 
needed to collect and document. 
Resilience of vegetation/habitat. The range land is part of pastoral livestock livelihood as 
pastoralists believe. There is a darling relationship between pastoralists, livestock and their 
environment due to their proximity. The land is their key asset, makes it possible to use its 
natural resource. However, as interviewed groups, in previous era the pastoral ecosystem was 
rich and full of vegetation, has all types of plants, flora, and minerals which suitable for both 
human being and animals life. 
For the last couple of decade, rangelands, forests and all types of vegetation gradually change 
from fertile lands into a desert land, due to recurrent hazards, climate variability, and other 
calamities, notably, gully erosion, soil degradation, intensive clearing and cutting of trees. As 
a consequence, palatable grass species and shrubs in the grazing area disappear, and this in 
turn, gradual invasions of unusual plants and vegetation drive away edible grazing species 
which livestock unable to digest or in cases cause unknown diseases or kill livestock. Also, 
insects, biting flies and infestation increase. 
According to Figure 4, the pastoralists resilience capacity over the past decades shown that 
their anticipative and absorptive capacity to minimize the shocks through planning and 
preparedness and also their adaptive capacity to respond to situations were effective and 
strongly reduced their vulnerability and support to their withstand to future events. However, 
transformative capacity through well-functioning system of disaster risk management is vital 
and important currently. This transformation for changing and improving of the critical 
situation faces pastoralists in the region amidst climate change and recurrent hazards required 
a comprehensive strategy applicable to the pastoral community nature. Though a number of 
strategies have been put in place, many of these policies were more agricultural-oriented and 
lack a profound understanding of pastoral community context, and thus eventually the 
expected results and outcomes completely did not achieve its targets. 
Indigenous knowledge for resilience and adaptation in pastoral production system of Somali … 
733 
Figure 4. The relationship between three types of capacities for strengthening resilience [22]. 
Broadly speaking, the resilience situation of the pastoral community in Sheygosh woreda is 
in a brink, in all aspects, socially, environmental, economical. Therefore, unless pertinent 
mechanisms put in place to address the underlying causes of existing vulnerability, the 
resilience capacity of pastoralist communities in Ethiopia will not persist and become more 
collective [23]. 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE ADAPTED BY PASTORALISTS IN SHEYGOSH 
Pastoral livelihood production in Somali community is subject to hazards and unpredictable 
shocks. At the same time this community inhabited arid and semi-arid climatic zone which is 
categorized one of highly susceptible to environment hazard. These adverse climatic 
conditions have led to be vulnerable and insecure pastoral livelihoods. Therefore, as group 
discussants discussed, the pastoral community has adapted different strategies and 
mechanisms in order to withstand in harsh ecology and ecosystem. 
According to Sheygosh community, the pastoral community has a long history of resilience 
and adaptation that practices over years. These strategies rely on mobility and movement, 
keep herds mixed types, informal social support network system, traditional institutions 
structure and knowledge reduce consumption of food, diversity of consumption, reducing 
non-essential spending and local migration and household member splitting and sending to 
towns and so on. However, these survival strategies are gradually adapted based on priority 
and importance. For instance, strategies which are most damaging to livelihood of 
community status or social structures are adapted last such as selling assets, farmlands and 
other prestige properties [19]. Pastoralists in semi and arid semi environment have the most 
strong and successful adaptable system among rural population systems [24]. 
Adaptation strategies practiced by the pastoral community in Sheygosh woreda as discussion 
groups revealed are more. But the common and the most useable in pastoralists to reduce the 
vulnerability results often from unpredictable and weather variability patterns. 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE FOR WEATHER FORECASTING  
Somali pastoralists in the study area have developed their own early warning system based on 
long-term observation and experience which is highly perceived as a source of anticipating 
and a tool for decision making. Therefore, in order to understand these weather forecasting 
traditional indicators, the outcomes of the discussions are grouped in the following sections. 
The pastoralists have been used various indicators as shown in Table 2. 
 
M.E. Ahmed and M.A. Bihi 
734 
Table 2. Major indicators use the pastoralists for forecasting. Sources: Focus Group 
Discussions and Key informant interviews. Key is rank ranging from low (1) to high (5). 
S/n Indicators of weather prediction 
Rank by priority based on 
community discussion outcomes 
1 Astral bodies indicators (stars, moon, sun  5 
2 Seasonal calendar  4 
3 Fauna (behaviours of livestock, animals, birds) 2 
4 Atmospheric indicators (clouds, winds, lighting) 3 
5 Flora (behaviours of plants and vegetation) 2 
6 Human practices, norm and cultures  1 
TRADITIONAL COPING AND ADAPTATION STRATEGIES 
Sahan (scouts). Sahan (scout) is a major source of information about the weather and climate 
change, since they are periodically on move in search of better pasture and water for their 
animals. Sahan system also plays a pivotal role on decision making processes on migration 
patterns. Normally, the assessment include, distance and condition of pasture and water, 
estimation on how long the fodder and water sustain a given number of livestock, type of 
fodder and others. 
Mobility/Migration (Hayan or keynaan). Mobility is the key strategic of coping with, 
adapting to and withstand in the pastoral community to reduce stresses. Mobility is an old 
existing dynamic system for pastoralists for move in and move out strategy. The mobility of 
pastoralists with their herds is well pre-planned and enough consultation with the elders in 
that locality. Before movement start, a few respected and knowledgeable men sent to survey 
areas which are expected to have better forage, free from insects and biting flies and suitable 
for residing. If a survey team finds a better place, Sahan marks the area and immediately 
informs the elders to move in the direction of the new location. 
According to the group discussion results, the pastoral community practices mobility over 
decades as a risk minimize and adapting mechanism strategy to hazards. 
Splitting of Herds and Families. During dry period when the access and availability of 
pasture and water deplete, pastoralists split their herds and families into different locations. 
Splitting of herds and families is one of the coping and adaptation strategies in order to 
reduce adverse impacts of hazards. The splitting of herds and families depends on the types 
and condition of animals and labour availability and requirement for those particular animals 
in particular location. 
The splitting of herds and families are risk reduction mechanisms that have been practiced for 
long by pastoralists. Animals may be kept in several different areas which reduce the effects 
of localized droughts, and disease outbreak. 
Eating wild trees (Qadhaabsi). During severe droughts people used to consume wild trees 
those have fruits or seeds as an alternative of stable food because of food deficiency. The 
common tree is Garas (tree species Dobera Glabra). This tree has seeds similar to beans seed 
and is evergreen tree. Before eating they dry under sun then kept/stored for household 
consumption throughout drought time. 
Land closure. Although closure or preserving land for grazing purpose was not commonly 
known in the study area, but for the last couple decade people were seen practiced in this type 
of coping particularly agro-pastoralists communities. The intention behind is to create a 
fodder bank for the use in drought time to mitigate the adverse impact of the drought on 
animals. This kind of land closure pastoralist termed on Jarmi. 
Indigenous knowledge for resilience and adaptation in pastoral production system of Somali … 
735 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONCLUSION 
The objective of the study was to explore the existing indigenous knowledge in pastoral 
livelihood system for resilience and adaptation used by communities in Sheygosh woreda as 
coping mechanisms to response hazards threat to their livelihood and environment. The Study 
found that pastoral production system is still the dominant livelihood in Sheygosh woreda for 
about 75 % of population. Nevertheless, the new move to agro-pastoralists is an alternative 
livelihood for nearly 15-20 % of population. 
According to the perception of Sheygosh woreda, over the last couple decades severe and 
frequent climate variability is observed notably, drought which is a recurrent phenomenon in 
their locality and has adverse impacts on people livelihood, ecosystem of rangeland, natural 
resources and social aspects as well livestock production. As a result, the traditional pastoral 
production system has faced a number of challenges that affecting the practicing of pastoral 
production system. The main attribute underlying reasons are recurring drought, generating 
of new alternative livelihoods, education role, restriction of movement and mobility, 
migration from rural to urban area, low basic service delivery and social protection, 
moderation and mindsets towards rural livelihood. 
The study shown that the pastoral community in the study location has numerous of effective 
traditional knowledge for resilience and adaptation strategies in the past, used to increase the 
livestock productivity and to minimize vulnerability. These strategies rely more or less on 
mobility and movement, diversity of livestock, social support network system (Zakat, 
xool-goyn – unconditioned free gift, dhowrto – surplus milk stored, sadaqah – almsgiving, 
qaadhaan – risk pooling, maalsin or irmansi – temporary loan), customary institution 
structure and traditional knowledge, reduce consumption of food, diversity of consumption, 
reducing non-essential spending and local migration. 
Broadly speaking, despite the effectiveness of indigenous knowledge strategies, the pastoral 
traditional risk management and coping strategies have increasingly become ineffective and 
will not be viable and sustainable in the coming years, due several underlying causes, including 
climate variability and prolonged hazards, lack of pro-poor livestock policies, absence of 
effective investment and intervention address social chronic problems, natural and environment 
problems and similarly economic and investment dimension of pastoral production. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Based on findings, this research proposes the following recommendations in order to build 
upon and promote pastoral indigenous knowledge in order to sustain the pastoral production 
system in the face of climate variability and prolonged calamities: 
 strengthening and restructuring of social protection intervention projects, includes expand 
microfinance systems, including pastoral and agro-pastoralist as a safeguard mechanisms, 
 multi-sectoral direct addressing to the underlying causes of low productivity and 
production of livestock, land degradation and rangeland habitats. 
 despite the pastoralists have traditional strategies for adapting to and withstand to climate 
variability very well, there is in dire need to build and support their mechanisms technical 
knowledge, in order to incorporate indigenous knowledge into national policy of disaster 
risk reduction, 
 documenting and identifying all pastoral resilience and adaptation strategies, such as 
environment, grazing land, livestock, social and also their knowledge for forecasting and 
indictors such as the trees, plants and birds which have traditional knowledge and value as 
climate indicators, declare them as protected species, 
M.E. Ahmed and M.A. Bihi 
736 
 although such strategies relevant to grazing system initiated several times, but still there is 
urgent need to put in place appropriate grassland management system, which contribute to 
increase resilience and adaptation and mitigation, as well as increasing pastoral production 
and food security minimize and reducing vulnerably, 
 recurrent shocks, risks and hazards have increasingly dictated to initiate proper risk 
management mechanisms or to reinforce already existing mechanisms to cope with the 
impacts of extreme climatic events, notably early warning systems, and risks and 
vulnerability mitigation activities. 
REFERENCE 
[1] World Initiative for Sustainable Pastoralism: Building climate change resilience for 
African livestock in sub-Saharan Africa: a program of IUCN. 
The International Union for Conservation of Nature, Eastern and Southern Africa Regional 
Office, Nairobi, 2010, 
https://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/resilence2.pdf, accessed April 2017. 
[2] Davies, J.; McGahey, D.N. and Ouedraogo, R.: Pastoralism and the Green Economy – a 
natural nexus? 
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources & United Nations 
Environment Programme, Nairobi, 2014, 
https://portals.iucn.org/library/sites/library/files/documents/2014-034.pdf, accessed 9
th
 March 2017, 
[3] African Union: Policy Framework for Pastoralism in Africa: Securing, Protecting and 
Improving the Lives, Livelihoods and Rights of Pastoral Communities. 
Department of Rural Economy and Agriculture, African Union, Addis Ababa, 2010, 
https://au.int/en/documents/20110131, accessed 20
th
 July 2015, 
[4] Dong, S.L., et al.: Vulnerability of Worldwide Pastoralism to global changes and 
interdisciplinary strategies for sustainable pastoralism. 
Ecology and Society 16(2), No. 10, 2011, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-04093-160210, 
[5] Kirkbride, M. and Grahn, R.: Survival of The Fittest: Pastoralism and Climate Change in 
East Africa. 
Oxfam Briefing Paper, August 2008. Oxfam International, 2008, 
[6] Desta, S.: Pastoralism and Development in Ethiopia. 
Economic Focus 9(3), 12-20, 2006, 
[7] Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia: Population Projection of Ethiopia for all Regions 
at Woreda Level from 2014 – 2017. 
Addis Ababa, 2014, 
http://www.csa.gov.et/images/general/news/pop_pro_wer_2014-2017_final, accessed March 2017, 
[8] Ayele, S.; Assegid, W.; Jabbar, M.A.; Ahmed, M.M. and Belachew H.: Livestock Marketing 
In Ethiopia: A Review of Structure, Performance and Development Initiatives. 
Socio-Economics and Policy Research Working Paper 52. International Livestock Research 
Institute, Nairobi, p.35, 2003, 
http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/agphome/images/iclsd/documents/wk2_c5_gerard.pdf, 
accessed 20
th
 June 2017, 
[9] Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia: Agricultural Sample Survey 2014-2015. 
Statistical Bulletin 578, Vol. II. Report on Livestock and Livestock Characteristics (Private 
Peasant Holdings). Addis Ababa, 2015, 
[10] Hundera, M.B.: The Gendered Drought Coping Mechanisms: The Study among 
Pastoralist Communities, In Shinile District, Somali Region, Ethiopia. M.A. Thesis. 
Larenstein University, Wageningen, 2010, 
[11] Bass, S.; Wang, S.S.; Ferede, T. and Fikreyesus, D.: Making Growth Green and 
Inclusive: The Case of Ethiopia. 
OECD Green Growth Papers 2013-07, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2013, 
Indigenous knowledge for resilience and adaptation in pastoral production system of Somali … 
737 
[12] Getahun, T. and Hassen, H.: Pastoralism and Land: Land Tenure, Administration and 
Use in Pastoral Areas of Ethiopia. 
Pastoralist Forum Ethiopia & International Institute of Rural Reconstruction & The Development 
Fund, 2010, 
[13] Hogg, R.: An Institutional Approach to Pastoral Development: An Example from 
Ethiopia. 
http://www.odi.org/resources/docs/5363.pdf, accessed September 2017, 
[14] Somali Region State Bureau of Finance and Economic Development: Development 
Indicative Plan (DIP) for Korahe zone. 
[15] Blench, R.: ‘You can’t go home again’ Pastoralists in the New Millennium. 
Overseas Development Institute, London, 2001, 
http://www.odi.org/resources/docs/6329.pdf, accessed 2
nd
 August 2017, 
[16] United Nations Development Programme: Overview: Green Economy and progress in 
Ethiopia. 
http://www.et.undp.org/content/dam/ethiopia/docs/UNDP%20Ethiopia%20Green%20Economy_
%20Overview.pdf, accessed 2017, 
[17] Sommer, F.: Pastoralism, Drought Early Warning and Response. 
http://www.unisdr.org/files/1865_VL102132.pdf, accessed 23
rd
 June 2017, 
[18] Save the Children UK and Disaster Prevention and Preparedness Commission: An 
Understanding of Livelihoods in Somali Regional State, Ethiopia. 
Save the Children UK & Disaster Prevention and Preparedness Commission, Addis Ababa, 2008, 
[19] Devereux, S.: Vulnerable Livelihoods in Somali Region, Ethiopia. 
IDS Research Report 57, Institute of Development Studies, Brighton, 2006, 
[20] Negatu, W.: Economic interactions of pastoral lowland and highland systems and 
implications for sustainable livelihoods: A case study in Northeastern Ethiopia. 
Research Report 7, Forum for Social Studies, Addis Ababa, p.57, 2011, 
[21] United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction: Climate Change and 
Disaster Risk Reduction: Weather, climate and climate change. 
http://www.unisdr.org/files/4146_ClimateChangeDRR.pdf, accessed 2017, 
[22] OECD: Guidelines for resilience systems analysis. 
https://www.oecd.org/dac/Resilience%20Systems%20Analysis%20FINAL.pdf, accessed 11
th
 March 
2016, 
[23] Pantuliano, S. and Wekesa, M.: Improving drought response in pastoral areas of Ethiopia 
Somali and Afar Regions and Borena Zone of Oromiya Region. 
Overseas Development Institute, London, 2008, 
[24] McGahey, D.; Davies, J.; Hagelberg, N. and Ouedraogo, R.: Pastoralism and the Green 
Economy – a natural nexus? 
http://apps.unep.org/publications/pmtdocuments/Pastoralism_and_the_Green_Economy, accessed 9
th
 
March 2017. 
