Promoting resilience in regional Australian industries: a case study of the North Queensland commercial fishing industry

Background: Promoting the sustainability of key existing industries is crucial to the continued development of regional Australia. In doing so, it is important to consider the role of industryworkers responsible for engaging with and adhering to sustainability guidelines and practices within these key industries. This is particularly important for industries such as commercialfishing due to the ongoing challenges they face. For example, challenges such as increasing operating costs, complex regulatory systems and the impacts of extreme weather, contribute todownsizing of the industry. Method: The findings from the case study discussed have been drawn from an ongoing PhD project investigating the role of commercial fishers in thesustainability of the North Queensland commercial fishing industry. Results: Interviews with commercial fishers highlight the perceived lack of genuine involvement of commercial fishers inthe development and implementation of industry regulations. From these interviews it was identified that commercial fishers did not feel included in the process of regulation developmentand implementation or that if they were involved, their input was not genuinely incorporated. Perceived lack of consultation has implications for how regulations are received, adhered toand endorsed by stakeholders. Discussion: Based upon the findings of this case study, it is suggested that stakeholders be genuinely involved in the development and implementation ofregulations. Genuine consultation processes may enhance the sustainability of key industries such as commercial fishing. For example, it is expected that those who engage in thedevelopment and implementation process are more likely to adhere to and engage in sustainability measures and practices leading to improved resilience of the industry.Background• Industries such as commercial fishing play an important role in regionalcommunities1 and have been identified as key industries in developingsustainable workforces throughout Australia2.• The commercial fishing industry faces numerous challenges that contribute tothe downsizing of the industry:• Dangerous nature of commercial fishing3, 4• Increasing operating costs5• Complex regulatory systems6• Climate change and extreme weather events7• Despite these challenges, commercial fishers remain motivated to stay in theindustry. Commercial fishers tend to perceive their livelihood as part of theiridentity and their way of life1, 8, 9.• A resilient commercial fishing workforce is therefore important to the existingcommercial fishing workforce9 and to the sustainable regional developmentof the industry1, 2.• As such, it is important to identify the ways in which the resilience of theseindustries can be improved.rebekah.boynton@my.jcu.edu.au@BekBoynton Promoting resilience in regional Australian communities: A case study of the North Queensland commercial fishing industryRebekah Boynton1,2, Dr Anne Swinbourne1, 2, 4 , Dr Connar McShane1, 2 and Prof. Marcus Sheaves 3, 41College of Healthcare Sciences, James Cook University; 2HABITT Research Group, James Cook University; 3College of Marine and Environmental Sciences,James Cook University; 4TropWATER (Centre forTropical Water and Aquatic Ecosystem Research), James Cook UniversityMethod• 23 fishers from the Queensland (n = 20) and New South Wales (n = 3) East Coast wereinterviewed about the challenges facing commercial fishers and the commercialfishing industry.• Participants were recruited through social media, newspaper articles, communityforums and snowball recruitment methods.• Semi-structured interviews typically lasted 50 minutes and were conducted withparticipants either alone (n = 17) or in groups of two (n = 6).• Participants also completed a brief demographic questionnaire.• Interviews were transcribed verbatim (any potentially identifying information wasnot transcribed) and analysed using NVivo v. 11.References1. Momtaz & Gladstone, 2008; 2. White Paper on Developing Northern Australia, 2015; 3. Jin, Kite-Powell & Talley, 2001; 4. Pollnac & Poggie, 2008; 5. Nursey-Bray,et al., 2012; 6. Shaw, Johnson & Dressler, 2011; 7. Grafton, 2010; 8. Marshall, Fenton, Marshall & Sutton, 2007; 9. Smith, Jacob, Jepson & Israel, 2003; 10. Kaplan &McCay, 2004; 11. Jagers, Berlin & Jentof, 2012; 12. Armitage, et al., 2008; 13. Sen & Nielsen, 1996; 14. Pomeroy, Katon & Harkes, 2001.Implications for Regulation Development & ImplementationFuture consultation processes should aim to provide genuine consultation with stakeholders. Specifically, consultation with stakeholders needs to demonstrate the benefits of engaging in consultation and the impact that engagement has on the decision making process14. Additionally, consultation opportunities need to be communicated appropriately in advance and should be flexible to meet the needs of stakeholders14. Results• A preliminary thematic analysis of the interview transcripts has been conducted andfrom the data it was identified that a primary concern of commercial fishers was themanagement of the commercial fishing industry. Emerging themes about workerinvolvement in industry management and regulations were also identified.• Participants reported a desire to engage in genuine consultation processes and somereported actively engaging in consultation processes currently available.• However, participants also reported barriers to engaging in consultation processes.• Primarily, participants perceived the consultation processes as not being genuine.• Participants reported poor communication of consultation opportunities as a barrierto engaging in consultation processes.• Furthermore, commercial fishers prioritise fishing over consultation meetingattendance.Discussion• The findings of this study highlight that commercial fishers have an interest in actively participating in consultation processes to improve the management of the commercial fishing industry, however barriers need to be addressed to facilitate effective management. • Poor consultation processes can have negative impacts such as increased tensions between governing bodies and stakeholders, low morale and inefficient management processes 10.• Genuine engagement through processes such as co-management are more likely to facilitate participation in sustainability measures and adherence to regulations 10, 11.• In turn, co-management strategies are suggested to improve the resilience of management processes in complex socio-ecological systems such as commercial fishing 12, 13. Age Gender Years in industry TotalRange M(SD) Male Female M(SD)31 – 81 53.61 (10.26)17 6 26.43 (12.36) 23The aim of this study was to explore the nature of the challenges faced by the commercial fishing workforce and investigate the perceived role of workers in improving industry resilience. “…the people that sit down and make up these issues that um affect uswould just give a bit more courtesy and a you know consult with us.”- Participant 11“I mean, quite a few of the meetings that have gone on here I’ve been at seafor and basically, I found out about it when I get back.”- Participant 12“But because we’re so limited like you say, we’re only getting say 120 good days to actually go out deep water. And I mean, when we do these meetings, it could be one of them.”- Participant 5“They did consult with commercial fishermen, but, but they didn’t listen tous.”- Participant 7“And we’re not being listened to.”- Focus Group 3