Regional resilience during the Great Irish Famine, 1845-1852: the role of common tenancy in spatial inequalities of food security (MUSSI Working Paper Series no.6)

MUSSI Working Paper Series
No – 6  December 2018
Regional resilience during the Great Irish Famine, 
1845-1852: the role of common tenancy in spatial 
inequalities of food security
Eoin Flaherty, Department of Sociology, Maynooth 
University 
1 
 
Regional resilience during the Great Irish Famine, 1845-1852: the 
role of common tenancy in spatial inequalities of food security 
 
Eoin Flaherty, Department of Sociology, Maynooth University 
 
This paper deals with two principal questions, drawing closely on the experience of 
Ireland. First, it addresses a deficit in our knowledge of resource governance 
institutions and land tenure systems as moderators of the impact of famine. We have 
known for some time of the extent and distribution of common tenancy systems in 
districts of 19th-century Ireland and across wider Europe, but little has been written 
about their role in determining levels of ecological risk exposure. Knowing that both 
distress and common tenancy were higher in marginal, impoverished Irish districts, 
this is an omission of some concern. Second, although current thinking on common-
pool resource governance suggests such systems were potentially robust to ecological 
stress, why did this not translate into greater resilience in the Irish case? The paper 
argues that to make sense of this contradiction, we must consider both the local 
behaviour of ecological stressors, and the wider context of Irish colonialism. Using 
local clustering analysis and geographically weighted regression, it shows how the 
impact of key stressors varied geographically. It concludes by suggesting that narratives 
and analyses of the role of common-pool resource governance in conferring ecological 
resilience must be tempered with a fuller appreciation of geopolitical context. 
 
Keywords: Ireland, nineteenth century, famine, commons, resilience 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Why does the Irish Famine of 1845-1852 continue to capture popular and academic imagination? 
Its status as the ‘last great subsistence crisis in the Western world’ begs questions of how such an 
event could occur in a colony of affluent industrial Britain. It also defies usual markers of recovery, 
as its population never recovered from an estimated excess mortality of 981,000 (Boyle and Ó 
Gráda 1986, 555), or 10-18% loss of total population due to combined mortality, and emigration. 
Whilst its sesquicentenary (1995) saw the release of a new wave of writing delving deeper into its 
proximate causes (Kinealy 2006), these questions are far from resolved. The respective role of the 
British State, its intentionality, the Malthusian nature of the event, and the role of landlordism 
remain open questions (Delaney 2012; Flaherty 2014; Ó Gráda and Kelly 2015). Similar questions 
on the role of colonial context come into play later in the 20th century in instances such as the 
Bengal Famine of 1943, where occupational restructuring under colonial rule set a disastrous 
context for the catastrophe which followed (Sen 1981). There is also recognition of the modest 
role Ireland may play in helping us to understand subsistence and ecological crises of modern 
times, such as Fraser’s work on resilience to climate change (Fraser 2006, 2007). Meanwhile, the 
literature on common pool resource systems, or ‘the commons’ has grown, albeit independently, 
of work on the Irish famine. This work emphasises the potential role of common-pool systems in 
conferring ecological robustness, and resilience to shock events, and the relative merits of socially 
embedded vs market-based solutions to ecosystem management (Janssen, Anderies, and Ostrom 
2007; Ostrom 1990; Ostrom et al. 2009).  
 
There is good reason for bringing these two bodies of work together. First, renewed attention has 
been given to the extent of common-pool resource governance in Ireland during the mid-19th 
century has recently emerged (Anderson 2010; Flaherty 2013, 2014; Slater and Flaherty 2009). 
Given its potential coincidence with an ecological catastrophe of global significance, it provides 
an ideal testing ground for theories linking institutional resilience with ecological outcomes. 
2 
 
Second, the pan-European significance of common-pool and non-capitalistic agrarian systems 
(Anderson 2010) suggests that Ireland still has much to teach us about processes and mechanisms 
of social change, given the complex coexistence of feudal, primitive-communal, and putative 
capitalistic modes of production throughout this time. Finally, by bringing previously unexploited 
data to bear on the subject, we may clarify more pointedly the potential role common-pool systems 
may have played in determining regional distress rates during the Irish famine, thus enhancing our 
understanding of its causal factors. This paper provides such a test.  
 
PROPERTY, LAND GOVERNANCE, AND MODELS OF FAMINE DISTRESS 
 
Since the publication of Amartya Sen’s (1981a) seminal work on the causation of famines, 
subsequent research has emphasised general factors underpinning instances of famine, coupled 
with a wider concern with issues of global food and resource security, and ecological sustainability. 
This is reflected in the current lexicon of human ecology, where concepts such as sustainability, 
resilience, and adaptive capacity dominate. Whilst these concepts are useful, there is a risk that - as 
with the concept of sustainability in recent decades – they lapse into metanarrative, in a manner 
which obscures their origins as useful ‘middle range’ methodological devices. Sen’s entitlements 
model remains one of the most cited in the famine studies literature. According to Sen, lapses in 
resource security giving rise to famine ultimately come about through a confluence of ‘entitlement 
collapses’, where opportunities for food acquisition through subsistence growing (direct 
entitlements), purchase (indirect entitlements), and public welfare (transfer entitlements) 
simultaneously collapse. The immediate benefit of this model was its ability to easily transcend 
Malthusian arguments focusing on population as a prime mover, shifting attention instead to 
national contexts and political infrastructures underpinning the distribution of food. Although the 
model has come in for subsequent criticism, such as Devereux’s charge of methodological 
individualism, and his lack of attention to non-market famine vectors (2001), it has remained 
markedly resilient. Central to its appeal amongst sociologists is its ability to undercut explanations 
which focus on food supply alone, toward those which emphasise socially-embedded resource 
systems. In this respect, one crucial deficiency identified by Devereux (2001) is that of the role of 
different institutionalised forms of resource governance in determining different levels of resource 
security. Whilst a methodological individualist approach might be blinded to such overarching 
institutional forms, evidence on their significance as moderators of resource security is substantial 
(Anderies, Janssen, and Ostrom 2004; Costanza et al 2001; Flaherty 2014; Futemma et al 2002; 
Janssen et al 2007; Ostrom 1990; Ostrom et al 2009).  
 
Compounding the steady drift of social scientists away from substantive analyses of resource 
inequality, is an unhelpful methodological divide. Whilst debate continues amongst proponents of 
complexity regarding the validity of the linear model (Byrne and Callaghan 2013), geographers 
have been developing statistical models to better capture spatial heterogeneity, and more accurately 
model spatially-varying processes. The potential for mutual benefit here is obvious. As narratives 
of resource security move further from ‘global’ accounts of macro-level drivers, the growing 
capacity of statistical techniques to corroborate these more nuanced mechanisms offers a welcome 
pairing. Such is the objective of this paper. Ireland remains a concerning case in famine studies. It 
continues to violate one of the standard benchmarks of post-famine recovery with a population 
level below that of 1841, and remains an area of active debate and research as new datasets and 
source documents are exploited (Delaney 2012; Flaherty 2013, 2014; Kinealy 2001; Ó Grada and 
Kelly 2015). As we continue to uncover more about the extent of non-capitalistic modes of 
resource governance in pre-famine Ireland and beyond (Anderson 2010; Krader 1975), its ability 
to speak not only to the famine studies, but also to the growing literature on the commons is 
substantial. Finally, the quality of data available for this period allows us to explore new statistical 
techniques for the detection and modelling of spatial heterogeneity, in a manner not adequately 
3 
 
accounted for in existing quantitative models of famine impact. Before examining these specific 
issues further, the following sections clarify the conceptual foundations of this analysis. 
 
THINKING GEOGRAPHICALLY: RESILIENCE, LOCAL DEPENDNCIES, AND 
TOBLER’S LAW 
 
A resurgence of interest in Waldo Tobler’s first law of geography, culminating in the publication of a 
discussion symposium in the Annals of the Association of American Geographers in 2004, saw renewed 
theoretical attention offered to a long-standing staple of human geography (Goodchild 2004; 
Miller 2004; Sui 2004; Tobler 2004). Tobler’s law, claiming ‘...everything is related to everything 
else, but near things are more related than distant things’ (Tobler 1970), may be interpreted in a 
number of ways. As a theory of spatially-varying relationships, it offers a basic defining principle 
for explanation in human geography: proximity and distance matter to the character of socio-
spatial relationships. As a diagnostic criterion, it formalises the phenomenon of spatial 
autocorrelation into a simple methodological principle, where the first law becomes a condition to 
be modelled in quantitative geographical analysis. In the Annals debate, attempts were made to 
extend the law beyond its narrowly-defined use within spatial modelling, as a means of making 
sense of mechanisms of local dependency, rather than a descriptor of spatial autocorrelation alone. 
It was here suggested that the literature on complex adaptive systems could serve such a facilitating 
role (Miller 2004). 
 
It is worth exploring this possibility further, considering the substantial volume of work in the 
fields of resilience and complexity which has emerged since the Annals discussion. The challenge 
however, is in reconciling the apparently simplistic idea of ‘proximity’ as a sufficient explanation 
of spatial relationships, with a body of theory which appreciates the complex nature of local spatial 
interactions. The wider social/ecological complexity literature may here be useful. This literature 
draws attention to the ways in which apparently simple local interactions can generate complex 
macro-geographies and emergent patterns, which transcend the properties of the units from which 
they are generated (Byrne 1998, 2005; Sawyer 2005). This does not imply that macro-complexity 
can be comprehended simply by studying the properties of constituent units as per the classic 
systemic paradigm (Skyttner 2005). Instead, it calls for careful attention to how we conceptualise 
systems themselves, and more importantly for this study, how we theorise the mechanisms which 
connect local behaviour to macro-structures and meso-institutions. This is as much the work of 
theory, as measurement and modelling, and is a staple concern of the resilience and complexity 
approaches. 
 
At its core, complexity offers a means of conceptualising societies and social systems as multilevel 
entities embedded in specific ecological-geographical contexts, rather than viewing them as 
disparate assemblages of social institutions alone (manifest in the collections of variables which we 
typically, and necessarily, adopt as substitutes for more detailed information on system 
composition). As an epistemology of social-ecological systems, it offers a powerful account both 
of the actions of agents which give rise to wider social structures, and the emergent macro-
properties which constitute our measurements as quantitative analysts. Complexity theory thus 
offers new opportunities to bring social theory back into dialogue with systems-based human 
ecology, from which it has long sought to distance itself. The general epistemology of complexity 
is complemented by the resilience approach, which views resource security not as a product of 
destabilising variables such as population growth alone, but because of patterns of cumulative risk 
exposure specific to the nature of local ecosystems. This approach works from the unique 
characteristics of food production systems themselves, to explain the causes of food and resource 
insecurity in specific contexts. (Berkes, Colding and Folke 2003; Cumming et al 2005; Fraser 2007; 
vanApelDoon et al 2011). Fraser (2006) for example, has suggested that measuring a system’s 
4 
 
degree of species diversity, biomass volume, and connectivity, offers a means of operationalising 
resilience as a measure of robustness to ecological stress. 
 
Together, these perspectives can serve as a means of reinvigorating both the first law, and the 
application of theory to the analysis of spatially varying relationships. By broadening the role of 
theory beyond that of law-like statements, to an appreciation of the generative mechanisms 
operating at local levels which give rise to spatial homogeneity and heterogeneity, the practice of 
geographical modelling can be brought closer into dialogue with wider theory in both human 
geography and human ecology. If we adopt as our basic principle the assumption that our units of 
analysis, at any given spatial scale, are complex open systems, comprised of emergent social, 
cultural, economic and ecological properties and levels, in a state of mutual interconnection (Capra 
2005; Cillers 2001; Harvey and Reed 2004), our task is to interpret our models in terms of the 
interactions of these various dimensions. This can be accomplished by thinking through 
mechanisms of local dependency, in a manner which incorporates aspects of culture, economy, 
and ecology, and the ways in which they conspire to create unique geographies of local interaction 
which may then be detected through more formal means. In short, whilst not rejecting the 
presence of stable patterns and structures, we must remain sensitive to local context, and the 
underlying complexity of interacting agents and social structures, which give rise to geographical 
patterns. We can begin to articulate and operationalise this task more clearly by focusing on the 
specific properties and dynamics of common-pool resource systems, and the extent to which they 
may mediate local patterns of ecological risk exposure.  
 
COMMON-POOL RESOURCE SYSTEMS AS MODERATORS OF ECOLOGICAL 
RISK 
 
As the resilience approach is one inherently geared toward understanding the spatially-varying 
nature of social-ecological systems, forming a sufficient overview of the general properties of the 
system in question is vital. In the conceptual language of resilience, this involves delineating the 
system’s identity, and using this information as a means of inferring the adaptive capacity of the 
systems institutions, or its ability to respond to disturbances in its environment. This resilience is 
a function of the institutional robustness of a system (i.e. the integrity of its governance institutions, 
its modes of resource management, demography, and economy) and contextual constraints placed 
upon the system (i.e. local ecology, climate, land ownership, state administration), which will tend 
to vary over space. Resilience may thus be provisionally defined as ‘...the capacity of a system to 
absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change so as to still retain essentially the same 
function, structure, identity, and feedbacks’ (Walker 2004 cited in Grimm and Calabrese 2011: 8). 
It is an invaluable heuristic for addressing shortcomings in structuralist systems theory, which has 
tended to search for general mechanisms giving rise to society-wide equilibrium, rather than case-
specific conditions of systemic reproduction and sustainability. In methodological terms, classical 
systems theory is rooted in an implicit discarding of the spatial heterogeneity assumption, through 
its insistence on cross-sectional modelling. Here we invoke the concept of resilience as a means of 
reconciling the general properties of common pool resource systems, with specific mechanisms of 
local dependency. 
 
There is much evidence suggesting that social-ecological systems with institutions that are adaptive 
to economic, political and ecological variability, experience heighted resilience to ecological stress 
through greater institutional robustness (Janssen, Anderies and Ostrom 2007; Wall 2014). This 
robustness is often explained as a function of cumulative experience internalised in institutions, 
whereby variations in local ecological conditions become adapted to within and between 
generations. Previous studies such as Ostrom (1990) have often observed ‘...that small-scale 
governance regimes that incorporate local knowledge, have clear rules that are enforced, and rely 
5 
 
on high levels of trust frequently perform well’ (Janssen, Anderies and Ostrom 2007, 308). 
Resource pooling is often a viable option for non-capitalist agricultural systems, in the absence of 
stocks of capital amongst individuals, and as a means of bringing new tracts of land into cultivation. 
Common-pool systems are especially appropriate when land productivity is low, yield reliability is 
low, capital investment is absent, and where large territories are involved (Ostrom 1990, 63). 
Viability within common-pool agrarian systems was often kept in check by consensus-based 
mechanisms, such as the scattering of an individual’s holdings in land strips of varying quality, 
restrictions on numbers of livestock in proportion to an individual’s arable holdings, and periodic 
rotation of individual plots amongst commune members which discouraged resource and labour 
hoarding on specific portions of common lands. 
 
According to Smith (2000), such common property regimes as exemplified by openfield agrarian 
systems, resolve several ecological difficulties engendered by the ‘problem’ of collective action, 
which has so occupied rational actor-oriented human ecology (Ostrom 1990). Within English, 
Swedish and German openfield systems of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, similar 
practices of strip dispersal as those later observed in Ireland prevailed, according to which each 
individuals’ holdings (themselves merely usufruct) were scattered in a series of intermixed strips 
throughout the joint lands of the village. Such a system was interpreted by Seebohm as bound with 
requirements of grazing, whereby the size of each temporary holding was determined by the 
number of oxen contributed by each tenant to the village or manorial plough team (Goransson 
1961, 83). Although some have been quick to idealise such arrangements as an archaic form of 
altruistic communality, others have pointed out that such scattering and redistribution functioned 
to permit combined tillage and grazing - otherwise impossible individually, owing to land and 
labour requirements - by maximising the grazing area available to the community after harvesting 
(Janssen et al 2007). These mechanisms of subdivision and plot scattering thus imposed collective 
ecological sanctions on excessive individual exploitation 
 
Common-pool resource governance systems in Ireland 
 
We suggested above that the rundale system in particular, and common pool resource systems 
generally, constitute a specific set of social-ecological properties and relations apart from those of 
pre-modern feudal and capitalist society. On the basis of comparative data, there is little doubt 
that common tenancy was widely distributed across many districts of mid-19th century Ireland, and 
even where it was a minority phenomenon, its presence marked it apart as a distinct mode of 
tenure and governance (McCabe 1991; McCourt 1955). The unique nature of common tenancy is 
well established in both documentary and statistical record. Early administrators were acutely 
aware of the residual influence of Gaelic legal code in local landholding practices, and as such, one 
of the first acts of Lord-Lieutenant Chichester in 1605 following the accession of James I, was to 
outlaw the practice of partible inheritance known as ‘gavelkind’. The highly localised, and 
community-based nature of Irish landholding and kinship was also remarked upon by Sir. John 
Davies in Of the Lawes of Ireland (c.1610), where he noted that lands were often distributed amongst 
local septs headed by deputed chiefs, with lands periodically redistributed between sept members 
(Davies 1610 cited in Kelly, 1997: 430).  
 
One school of thought which locates the origins of common tenancy in the pre-Gaelic era, suggests 
that such practices may have subsequently congealed over centuries into stable local identities 
giving rise to the geographical divisions of townlands, which remain in use to this day. Despite 
attempts by local landowners to subvert the system, by the 19th century, survey figures from the 
appendices of the Devon Commission (1845) show that 59%, 58%, and 29% of the lands of Counties 
Kerry, Mayo, and Clare respectively, were held in common or joint tenancy at the time of 
recording. Variance between unions within counties was more pronounced still, with 83% of the 
6 
 
union of Westport (Co. Mayo), 71% of the union of Scariff (Co. Clare), and 50% of the union of 
Kenmare (Co. Kerry) recorded as held in common. Local patterns thus appear to be of primary 
importance, and the omission of such from cross-sectional models presents a concerning degree 
of potential confounding. The specific characteristics of these areas were also quite distinct from 
those of wider Irish society at the time. As the following table shows (table 1), there were sharp 
qualitative differences in the composition of these common-pool systems along key dimensions. 
 
 
Table 1. Composition of common-pool resource systems 
Dimension Common-pool system Individualised system 
Tenure Joint or partnership Individual 
Property transmission Partible inheritance Primogeniture 
Settlement morphology Nucleated Dispersed 
Field system Openfield (infield-outfield) system with communal share allocation 
Enclosed fields, stable boundary 
demarcation 
Local governance Governance by communal council / headman Solitary decision making 
Legal reckoning Customary law, usufruct entitlement Civil / common law, private property 
Village structure Absence of services (public house or church) 
Growth of township to include 
services 
Demography High fertility, high subdivision Restricted subdivision, high migration, impartible inheritance 
 
Whilst the presence of the above conditions is well noted in the wider literature on the Irish 
rundale, the productive activities of these areas, and in turn their potential resilience to ecological 
risk, was filtered through the wider country-wide context of colonialism. The non-capitalistic 
nature of the Irish rental system (to which all tenures were beholden under colonialism), is 
corroborated by the absence of a supply-and-demand price-setting mechanism for Irish rents. Irish 
rent was instead determined by the number of intermediary sub-tenancies, as landlords often sub-
let their properties extensively to middlemen and land agents. Thus, whilst Ireland’s level of 
outward trade in agricultural produce lent it the appearance of a putatively capitalistic society, the 
social relations of production remained rooted in a feudal rental regime with highly variable 
patterns and extents of direct local control. This system was interspersed with extensive tracts of 
common-pool resource governance where lands were held and administered in common, a 
situation which remained in some districts into the early 20th century. Because of the overarching 
feudal rental system, all common-pool regions operated under the auspices of a joint leasehold 
system geared as much toward rent production, as to subsistence. Rundale thus remained a highly 
constrained system, according to the specific nature of local colonial land administration. Our 
methodological task is thus to identify regional measures which best capture these degrees of 
constraint, and to formulate an appropriate modelling strategy. 
 
 
7 
 
DATA AND METHOD 
 
Although some attempt was made to quantify regional patterns of risk exposure in the context of 
severe famine previously, (Flaherty 2014), this analysis relied on data measured at county level 
(N=32), thus limiting the scope for multivariate modelling. The following analysis draws on a set 
of aggregate data measuring a range of physical, social, economic, and agricultural conditions at 
Poor Law Union level (N=130), which allows for the specification of more complex models than 
previously possible. Owing to the importance of both the extent of common tenancy, and ration uptake 
(measured originally at union level), this level of analysis is most appropriate for maximising the 
availability of additional variables. The data are sourced from a range of publicly available reports 
and statistical abstracts compiled between 1841 and 1849. Summary statistics for all variables are 
provided below in table 2, and all sources are cited in the data appendix below (Appendix 1). This 
analysis draws on the decennial population census, and annual agricultural censes, Commission of 
Inquiry into the Occupation of Land in Ireland (Devon Commission), and the Reports of the 
Select Committee on Poor Laws. All relevant calculations are noted, and any applied 
transformations are noted in the figure titles and regression tables.  
 
 
Table 2. Summary statistics  
Variable Mean SD Min Max Moran’s I 
Ration uptake (standardised rate of relief 
ration uptake, 1847) 0 1 -1.44 3.85 .685*** 
Population density (individuals per acre, 
1841) .49 .45 .14 4.02 .191*** 
Poor law valuation (£pounds per acre) .87 1.43 .02 12.82 .298*** 
Consolidation of holdings (% change in 
proportion of farms over thirty acres, 1848-
1849) 
3.06 7.28 -17.06 38 .185*** 
Uncultivated land (% total cropland 
uncultivated, 1847) 71.44 12.29 40.72 97.08 .442*** 
Corn yield (% change in corn yield 
[kilograms per acre], 1847-1849) -8.09 19.10 -45.39 75.64 .123*** 
Total crop area (percentage change in total 
crop area, 1847-1849) 1.54 2.27 -3.95 6.74 .182*** 
Flax cultivation (% area under flax, 1847) 1.14 2.03 0 9.52 .628*** 
Common tenancy (% lands held in 
common or joint tenancy) 8.00 15.25 0 83.88 .224*** 
*p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Table 3. Inter-item correlations 
 
R
at
io
n 
Po
pu
la
tio
n 
Va
lu
at
io
n 
Co
ns
ol
id
at
io
n 
U
nc
ul
tiv
at
ed
 
Co
rn
 
Cr
op
 
Fl
ax
 
Population -.184*        
Valuation -.200* .962***       
Consolidation .226** -.227* -.237**      
Uncultivated .515*** -.331*** -.309*** .085     
Corn -.175* -.130 -.137 -.181* .109    
Crop -.227** .112 .058 -.194* -.062 .006   
Flax -.340*** -.044 -.100 -.158 -.161 .082 .248**  
Common 
(log) .290*** .023 -.021 .161 .266*** -.069 -.038 .100 
*p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001 
 
The dependent variable is the rate of relief ration uptake, following the approach used by Kinealy 
(2006) in her appendix indicating areas suffering high levels of distress. Following initial discussion 
concerning the establishment of a system of rate-based poor relief in pre-famine Ireland, the famine 
relief activities of the Select Committee on Poor Laws were recorded in a series of reports presented to 
parliament in 1847. An important set of statistical tables in these reports tabulates the extent of 
mitigating activities undertaken by the relief commissioners in July of this year. Owing to increases 
in the import of foodstuffs throughout this time, a reduction in domestic food prices enabled the 
commissioners to subsidise outdoor relief in the form of rations (either gratuitously, or at reduced 
cost according to individual means), with characteristically liberal warnings of market interference, 
and the necessity of countering tendencies toward idleness. These issued rations consisted of 
1&1/4lb of bread (or 1lb biscuit or meal), or 1 quart of soup thickened with a portion of meal 
along with ¼ ration of bread (Second Report of the Relief Commissioners... 1847). The first table 
of records concerning the issue of rations appears in the Second Report of the Relief 
Commissioners, and distinguishes between rations issued gratuitously to the registered destitute, 
and those sold to individuals of limited means at reduced cost (ibid). Statistics employed in the 
forthcoming analysis are limited to those concerning the issue of gratuitous rations, which in a 
majority of unions significantly outnumber those sold at subsidised rates. The data are drawn from 
six successive reports of May 8th, June 5th, July 3rd, July 31st, August 28th and September 11th, 1847. 
The largest number of rations issued on a single date across all reporting periods was selected for 
inclusion. The rate of ration uptake per head of population was first calculated, before z-score 
standardisation.  
 
Our key independent variable is the extent of common tenancy, sourced from the statistical tables 
of the Devon Commission (1845), which records in Appendix 94 the ‘Area of Union in Statute 
Acres’, and ‘Total Number of Acres Held in Common or Joint Tenancy’, permitting calculation of 
a comparable rate. Figures at union level exhibit greater variation than those reported at county 
level in previous studies such (Almquist, 1977), and when aggregated to county level, such variation 
is lost owing to significant differences in the extent of recorded communal tenure within individual 
counties. For example, despite 50% of the lands of the union of Kenmare, Co, Kerry being noted 
as held in common, the union of Caherciveen – also falling within Co. Kerry - shows none. McCabe 
9 
 
(1991) suggests that joint tenancy may have been under-enumerated however, owing to the reliance 
of union clerks on union rate books. As such, any potential errors in the compilation of figures are 
likely to affect absolute levels within unions, rather than the variance, which is of primary concern. 
When corroborated with other estimates of the extent of common tenancy such as McCourt’s 
clachán distribution map compiled from first edition six-inch ordnance survey maps (1971: 138-
139), we can be confident that these figures are representative of between-union variation in rates 
of common tenancy. Further details on other variables used in this analysis are available in appendix 
one. 
 
Our analysis proceeds in two distinct stages. First, preliminary descriptors of the clustering 
behaviour of spatial attributes are investigated using Moran’s I and Getis-Ord Gi*. The challenge 
in these initial phases is of squaring the proscriptions of Tobler’s law with the data-generating 
process giving rise to observed clustering effects. Here we draw on the theoretical insights of 
resilience and complexity theory to articulate these connections more clearly. This involves 
thinking carefully about the substantive mechanisms underpinning local dependencies across the 
range of included predictors. Moran’s I measures the slope of a bivariate plot of a given variable 
against its spatial lag calculated from as the mean of both a unit, and its set of defined neighbours. 
Neighbours are here defined by ‘Queen’ contiguity, which includes the unit, and all proximate 
units in direct contact with any portion of its boundary. Accordingly, a positive slope indicates 
close correspondence between the variable and its spatial lag (i.e. its neighbours). In specification, 
Moran’s I is an extension to the standard product-moment correlation, with the addition of a 
spatial weights matrix capturing dependencies between contiguous regions (Brunsdon and Comber 
2015, 230). Variables are centred prior to plotting and calculation.  
 
Getis-Ord Gi* compares the local mean of a feature and its defined neighbours against the global 
mean, producing a plot identifying statistically significant instances of ‘high-high’ and ‘low-low’ 
clusters. This approach identifies areas which represent a significant departure from the global 
norm, and are useful for gaining a visual appreciation of local clustering behaviour. As with the 
Moran diagnostics, we use contiguity definitions of neighbouring rather than fixed bandwidths. 
Together, both Moran’s I and Getis-Ord Gi* permit closer investigation of the local and global 
behaviour of particular variables. Second, having explored the presence of geographical clustering 
effects, we present a geographically weighted multivariate regression model (GWR) of factors 
contributing to local distress rates. In this specification, independent variables become functions 
of both a location and its attribute, thus permitting variation in parameters over space (Brunsdon 
and Comber, 2015, p. 291). The standard regression model maintains fixed parameter estimates 
across the entire set of data. Adding a location represented by coordinates allows coefficients, 
intercepts, and diagnostics to vary as a function of different weighting methods – typically distance-
based bandwidths/moving windows, or contiguity functions. In effect, this method estimates an 
iterative series of restricted models utilising cases falling within a given bandwidth, thus 
constructing a distribution of values from the standard regression output.  
 
Parameters are estimated through ordinary least squares, and both fixed and adaptive bandwidths 
based on Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) are provided. For comparison, these models are 
compared to cross-sectional OLS with cluster-robust standard errors. Interpretation of models is 
aided by the provision of mapped model output, allowing visual assessment of local parameter 
behaviour. This section argues that cross-sectional analyses which discard the potential for spatial 
autocorrelation introduce a critical source of potential error into their conclusions – substantive 
and theoretical. Consequently, by examining this local variation we come closer to understanding 
how this complex mix of contextual factors conspired to produce uneven rates of distress across 
the island throughout this time. We interpret these results in context of resilience theory’s emphasis 
10 
 
on local adaptive capacity as a central property mediating the geography of ecological risk 
exposure. 
 
UNDERSTANDING THE LOCAL GEOGRAPHY OF FAMINE 
 
To what extent do these variables show local clustering? Are there regional disparities in the 
distribution of values, and if so, how can we account for this? The classic rendering of Tobler’s 
law suggests proximity plays a key role in the patterning of social-geographical relations. Proximity 
alone is insufficient to account for observed autocorrelation however; this must be supported with 
a valid narrative of the mechanisms generating this effect. In terms of theorising, critical realism 
approaches this through a process of ‘retroduction’ or rational abstraction. This neither precedes, 
nor derives from the act of measurement, but is enacted as its complement. Its basic premise is 
that we must abstract from the concrete-empirical phenomenon itself, to identify the mechanisms 
through which its causal properties are activated (Roberts 2006: 70). Whilst the detection of 
associations through measurement constitutes an extensive form of inquiry, this process is 
intensive, insofar as it requires us to think conceptually about how a phenomenon comes to behave 
as it does (Roberts 2006: 73-74). The result is a combination of theory and method which 
transcends the typically positivistic primacy of measurement, and this is a guiding principle of the 
coming discussion.  
 
From table 3, we see that our outcome variable shows moderate correlation with other predictors. 
These are intuitively signed, with higher valuation, crop yield, productive area, and flax growth 
associated with reduced ration uptake. The negative sign of population density is likely detecting 
the effect of urban concentration in areas such as Dublin, Cork, Waterford, and Belfast. As such, 
this is likely detecting the comparative affluence of certain areas particularly within Dublin. It is 
difficult to detect the impact of population density in Western districts however. Although we may 
hypothesise that it was substantial, it is more likely to have taken the form of high-density 
settlement pockets, within otherwise sparse and spacious regions. The presence of large tracts of 
grazing land, which in turn impacted on the ability of common-pool systems to expand under 
population pressure, is also likely to have diminished the sensitivity of this measure to smaller, 
more localised high-density settlement. Similarly, settlement consolidation, the presence of 
uncultivated land and the extent of common tenancy are associated with higher rates of ration 
uptake. 
 
Turning to the autocorrelation figures (Moran’s I) in table 2, we find substantive, and statistically 
significant degrees of spatial autocorrelation across all variables (see also figure 3 and 4). Ration 
uptake records a score of .685, the largest of all variables. This is easily accounted for visually as 
can be seen in figure 1 showing strong concentration in Western regions. Common tenancy also 
exhibits a modest degree of spatial autocorrelation, which is likely diminished by the presence of 
isolated pockets of common tenancy in the southeast and southwest as shown in figure 2. Those 
of the southwest – South Kilkenny in particular – represent a different form of commune to that 
described by the typical criteria of common-pool governance described above. These areas are 
mostly devolved manorial villages of the three-field system, which acquired their nucleated 
morphology during Norman occupation, but without accompanying communal institutions 
(Burtchaell 1988). Inspection of the spatial lag plots of these variables (figures 1 and 2) reveals 
more, with evident linearity in the lag of ration uptake, but a less certain trend in common tenancy. 
Finally, Getis-Ord Gi* plots for both variables reveal significant hotspots departing from the 
global average, and clustering along the Western seaboard - particularly in Western counties Mayo, 
Clare, and Kerry. Together, these indices provide strong corroboration of the importance of local 
dependency in the behaviour of variables, with clear patterns emerging between East-West, and 
11 
 
North-South. In all instances, Western regions associated with the ‘small-farm’ archetype (Whelan 
2000) display especially strong clustering behaviour. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Ration Uptake 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Lands held in Joint or Common Tenancy 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Spatial lag plot, ration uptake 
 
13 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Spatial lag plot, common tenancy 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Getis-Ord Gi*, Ration uptake 
 
 
14 
 
 
Figure 6. Getis-Ord Gi*, Common tenancy 
 
Mechanisms of local dependency 
 
How can we account for this clustering beyond surface measurement? How did these patterns 
arise, and how might they be reinforced by the institutional structures of common-pool 
governance? Mindful of the restrictions on inference to lower-order units inherent in any 
ecological analysis, we can nonetheless begin to detail several mechanisms (also summarised below 
in table 4). Poor law valuation is a measure closely linked to potential land productivity and 
profitability. As such, it is closely linked to a range of factors such as predominant regional 
economic activities, the positions of unions within regional archetypes (whether tillage, pastoral, 
or quasi-subsistence), and local geology (Collins 2008). Thus, we find a characteristic East-West 
bias in the distribution of valuation, with a concentration of low valuation in Western peripheries. 
The mechanisms underpinning this include a predominance of low capital-intensity in Western 
small-farm production (characteristic of labour-intensive common-pool systems), an underlying 
geology which confers a characteristically shallow, heavily-leached soil bed (Evans 1979), and 
higher extents of land subdivision which diminished the introduction of plant and capital to the 
labour process. The geography of valuation may indeed be underpinned by more thoroughgoing 
historical processes. The hypothesised post-17th century westerly migration of a dispossessed 
peasantry in the wake of the Cromwellian plantation for example, which may have created an 
immediate need for labour pooling to break in new lands for cultivation (Braa 1997).  
 
The process of consolidation of holdings displays a more intuitive regional signature. In the post-
Napoleonic period, grain and stock price fluctuation dictated much of the character of regional 
restructuring, as landlords sought to move away from high density tillage production, toward land-
intensive grazing in response to rising stock and wool prices. Local styles of land administration 
also played a role; hence we find contradictory mass evictions on the Nixon estates of Donegal, 
the Mahon estates of Roscommon, and the Walsh estates of Mayo, yet investment, improvement, 
15 
 
and resettlement on the Hill estates of Donegal (Mac Aoidh 1990; Yager 1996). The post-
Napoleonic years marked a watershed in this respect, insofar as the key channels of profitability 
for landlords shifted from increasing the supply of tenantry engaged in tillage, toward clearing 
estates to make way for capital-intensive grazing. Approximately 37,286 evictions were carried out 
between 1846-1849, marking a key stressor on the capacity of common-pool districts to maintain 
their essential structures (Orser 2006). The result was a spatially uneven pattern of redistribution, 
with varying degrees of direct local intervention by landowners. 
 
Our four measures of productive activity, uncultivated land, corn yield, total crop area and flax production 
map well onto the processes described for valuation and consolidation, and constitute a key factor 
in local resilience and adaptive capacity. The availability of wasteland was a key factor facilitating 
the expansion of the Irish common-pool rundale system. On peripheral lands, the systems’ 
tendency toward demographic expansion through subdivision, facilitated by the encroachment of 
communes onto new marginal lands was an essential factor of its resilience. This was an 
unfortunate precondition of the Great Famine, as the prolific potato allowed smallholders to settle 
comparatively smaller plots of land, thus enhancing the concentration of biomass, and lowering 
species diversity in the pre-famine years (Fraser 2006). Considering Ireland’s rate of population 
growth in early 19th century Ireland, which rose 72% from 4,753,000 in 1821, to 8,175,124 in 1841, 
the capacity of individual settlements to incorporate new members whilst retaining its delicate 
balance of tillage and grazing, was essential – wasteland played a crucial role in this regard. Villages 
often grew exponentially, with noted instances of unchecked settlements evolving from a handful 
of homesteads to over thirty within a single generation (Aalen, Whelan and Stout 1997). In the 
absence of external constraints, expansion was often limited primarily by local geography and 
geology, but under colonialism, the calculus of international markets played a dominant role in the 
annexation of neighbouring lands by landlords for capital-intensive activities. The result was a 
heightened strain on communes who were now forced to accommodate new members by further 
subdividing their existing space, or by colonising parts of their grazing ground for tillage, thus 
upsetting the balance of pasture and tillage central to the systems’ identity.  
 
Corn yield and total crop area both capture changes in production from 1847-1849, the peak years of 
hardship. Although both exhibit low degrees of spatial autocorrelation, they constitute key 
components of regional resilience. These measures are arguably preferable approximations of 
resilience, as they deal with longitudinal change, sourced as they are from the annual agricultural 
censes which began in 1847. It is telling in this regard, that both corn yield and crop area are 
negatively correlated with consolidation and ration uptake (table 3). These measures capture 
seasonal yield consistency during the peak famine months, and declines in cultivated space, 
potentially linked to lower labour input and forced land enclosures. Corn yield is of interest as, 
despite the depiction of Western regions as wholly potato-dependent, grains featured prominently 
in the production process owing to the necessity of rent payments – sales of grain typically meeting 
these obligations. Thus, whilst potatoes were largely consumed, or their surplus used as stock 
fodder, grains were essential to avoid falling into arrears and losing tenure. The net effect of 
physical restrictions on the capacity of rundale to expand, coupled with continuing rent obligations 
despite the hardship of the peak famine years, meant surrendering an ever-greater proportion of 
tillage area to non-subsistence crops. This particularly affected peripheral areas, especially 
common-pool regions, which depended on a delicate balance of tillage and stock for their viability. 
As such, we find a concentric diminishing of yield from East to West, consistent with the 
predominance of intensive tillage along the Southern to North-Eastern Anglo-Norman tillage 
crescent. The pattern is less pronounced for changes in crop area, consistent with its low degree 
of spatial autocorrelation, although large pockets are to be found toward West-Connaught, and 
south-westerly toward Limerick and Kerry. 
 
16 
 
Our outcome, and key predictor (ration uptake and common tenancy) display clearer spatial patterning, 
visually and diagnostically. Whilst evidence of autocorrelation for common tenancy is low owing 
to the haphazard intermixing of high-low density areas, it correlates positively with ration uptake. 
Figures 5 and 6 show results from the Getis-Ord procedure, which reveals clear concetrations of 
hotspots in Western counties. Consistent with evidence governing the distribution of flax 
production in the North, we also find concentrations of lower ration uptake in Northern unions. 
The mechanisms underpinning this characteristic geography are rooted in the factors of 
production and productivity outlined above, as well as historical circumstance, and public policy 
(Delaney 2012). Our range of contextual variables describes well the conditions which facilitated 
higher densities of rundale – marginal lands of low productivity, regions with high volumes of 
direct producers subsisting on a narrow range of root crops (chiefly the potato), a characteristic 
dependence on an openfield system with customary subdivision, and a demographic boom from 
the early-mid 19th century. With the removal of barriers to early family formation, fertility soared 
amongst smallholder. Common-pool systems facilitated this through internal subdivision of 
commune lands, facilitated by the prolific nature of the potato. Such was the pace of 
fragmentation, that by 1841, 45% of all holdings in Ireland were under five acres, with higher 
regional rates such as 64% recorded in Connaught (Connell 1950: 284).  
 
The concept of panarchy from the resilience literature connects these factors well to the decline 
of adaptive capacity at settlement level, and their vulnerability to ecological stress. According to 
Fraser’s formulation, a tri-axial model of connectivity, biomass volume, and species diversity 
provides a quick index of an ecosystem’s resilience. As connectivity (settlement fragmentation) 
heightens, coupled with a reduction in species diversity (monoculture), and an increase in biomass, 
the magnitude of disturbance required to induce systemic collapse becomes ever smaller. Such 
were the circumstances in Ireland on the eve of the famine, however models to date have note 
taken adequate account of the uneven geography of resilience. As our diagnostics show, these 
factors were both locally correlated, and spatially distributed, such that a general model cannot be 
applied universally to the entire territory. Institutional structures – particularly the unique dynamics 
of Irish common-pool governance played a crucial role in the construction of this geography, 
mediating the impact of the specific antagonist - in the Irish case, the blight strain which decimated 
crops over multiple seasons. Consequently, explanation is not to be found in the character of 
colonialism, nor single stressors such as population alone, but rather in their interactions, and 
spatial distribution. Our final piece of analysis thus examines the impact of common tenancy, 
controlling for these contextual factors.   
 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4. Mechanisms of local dependency 
Variable                    Mechanism 
Population density 
Classic mechanism of rundale expansion: high fertility, partible inheritance, endogenous 
expansion, and clachan morphology engendered high density settlement. Density also 
played a role in the spread of communicable disease. Our data are detecting higher urban 
densities. 
Poor law 
valuation 
Valuation linked closely to productivity and productive capacity of land, and in turn, the 
profitability of particular activities corresponds with wider economic circumstances such 
as the relative prices of produce (i.e. grain vs wool vs stock). 
Consolidation of 
holdings 
Strong regional differences in estate reconfiguration post-Napoleonic war, moderated by 
price of produce, extent of direct control over estates and labour within settlements. 
Uncultivated land 
Availability of wasteland a key contextual variable in the growth of rundale both through 
outward reclamation from within, and new settlement colonisation. Elevation is also 
important, as such settlements tended to thrive on higher, marginal lands. 
Crop yield 
Strong patterning of production and yield according to ‘regional archetypes’, with 
particularly strong output in certain specialised areas (i.e. the Anglo-Norman Southern-
Eastern tillage tract). Yield consistency reflects regional ecological and economic resilience. 
Flax production 
Regional clustering of linen production in the Ulster linen triangle, in certain districts of 
West Mayo, with proximity to linen markets, household divisions of labour, and availability 
of labour a key factor. Linen production reflects a diversity of income streams beyond sole 
dependence on single crops, and is a key factor in settlements resilience to external stress. 
Common holding 
Settlements constituting rundale identity (table 1, ‘common pool system’) thrived in 
marginal land-poor districts, at higher altitudes, and under favourable grain prices where 
landlords encouraged tillage.  
Ration uptake 
Together, these factors conspired to lower resilience to distress amongst common-pool, 
and land-poor regions. With the balance of openfield production disrupted, continuing 
rent obligations, restrictions on expansion, monoculture of dietary potato dependence, 
low species diversity, disease in turn thrived.  
18 
 
A GEOGRAPHICALLY WEIGHTED MODEL OF FAMINE DISTRESS 
 
 
Table 5. Regression Output (OLS and Geographically Weighted)  
 OLS (cluster-robust errors) GWR  (Fixed Bandwidth) 
GWR  
(Adaptive 
Bandwidth) 
Common (log) .544*** .284** - .290* (.073) 
.300* 
(.059) 
Population - 1.54*** 1.508** 1.323* (.536) 
1.472** 
(.409) 
Valuation - -.541*** -.510*** -.477** (.140) 
-.511** 
(.109) 
Consolidation - .004 .006 .007 (.009) 
.008 
(.008) 
Uncultivated - .035*** .031*** .030*** (.009) 
.031*** 
(.010) 
Corn yield - -.010*** -.009 -.011** (.003) 
-.011** 
(.002) 
Crop area - -.064** -.069*** -.040 (.032) 
-.041 
(.037) 
Flax cultivation - -.150*** -.148*** -.096* (.076) 
-.091* 
(.068) 
Common 
(Group 1) - - reference - - 
Common 
(Group 2) - - -.109 - - 
Common 
(Group 3) - - -.153 - - 
Common 
(Group 4) - - .694** - - 
Constant -.312*** -2.743*** -2.369*** -2.448*** (.540) 
-4.235*** 
(.608) 
F (1, 128) 21.95*** 
(8, 121) 
13.25*** 
(10, 119) 
11.49*** (8, 121) 41.894 (8, 121) 44.482 
Adj R2 .1397 .4318 .5115 .605 .593 
AIC 360.476 304.1097 296.793 268.379 270.519 
Mean VIF - 4.90 4.31 - - 
Neighbours - - - - 117 
Bandwidth - - - 149 km - 
N 130 130 130 130 130 
*p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001 
In the GWR column, coefficient standard deviations are in parentheses. 
 
 
19 
 
Table 5 displays parallel results from a set of cross-sectional, and geographically weighted models, 
and visual diagnostics (residual plots and R2) are provided in figures 7-10. Across all cross-sectional 
specifications, coefficients are signed intuitively according to the mechanisms detailed above. 
Common holding displays strong positive association with ration uptake, recording one of the 
strongest effect sizes aside from population density. Population density is signed positive in all 
specifications, and strongest of all predictors, however it must be interpreted with caution. While 
the impact of population density is intuitive in terms of the mechanisms outlined above – 
particularly in high-density common pool regions -  the variable is itself only weakly correlated 
with common holding (table 3). As such, the positive effect of population is likely due to high-
density urban regions into which numbers of destitute flooded during the peak famine years. 
Rather than marking a departure however, urban areas were themselves sites of vast inequality (in 
the case of Dublin) and high mortality, especially in high-density tenement districts.  
 
Additional stressors of ration uptake include consolidation (of small magnitude), and uncultivated 
lands. In line with our discussion of the role of productivity above, consistency of yield and 
productive area are both associated with lower ration uptake. Corn yield is particularly interesting, 
as although recorded potato acreages were provided through the agricultural censes, the 
widespread destruction of crops makes systemic comparison of true yield estimates impossible, 
whilst turnips are of too small a count to substitute. As corn production is widely distributed across 
the island, the capacity of regions to maintain output - itself dependent not only on ecological 
circumstance but also institutional robustness – is a useful resilience indicator. Flax cultivation 
captures not only the comparative resilience of Northern Ulster, but of the importance of 
economic diversification. According to Sen’s classic entitlements model, the collapse of indirect 
entitlements constitutes one of three key sustenance channels in a healthy economy. One avenue 
toward widening indirect entitlement channels at settlement level is economic diversification, and 
our results suggest that the diversity of income streams offered by cottage industries engaged in 
flax production and ‘putting-out’, played a key role in enhancing their resilience to ecological stress.   
 
Model three, from the first set of cross-sectional specifications is of particular interest, as it 
decomposes common tenancy into four discrete categorical groupings. This is desirable, as the 
variable is negatively skewed, with a cluster of high-value cases toward the right tail of the 
distribution. Categorisation was performed through k-means clustering, with an input condition 
of four, yielding a set of comparator groups for which group 4 displayed the highest group mean. 
Group four is here associated strongly and positively with heightened ration uptake, suggesting 
the bulk of the global positive effect was borne by regions of high common tenancy, as other 
groupings show negative values relative to the reference. Whilst this is somewhat to be expected, 
its magnitude is striking, further suggesting that the neglect of common tenancy to date has led to 
oversight of a key dynamic in rural social structure. 
 
Both geographically weighted models offer some improvement on the overall explanatory power 
of the included variables, with the fixed and adaptive specifications improving the R2 substantially. 
While this is also due in part to the inclusion of additional parameters in the GWR specification, 
the AIC also records a reduction, and this figure is itself adjusted for the complexity of the model, 
suggesting the GWR is the preferred specification. Whilst the fixed bandwidth performs marginally 
better diagnostically, the adaptive is a more intuitive fit with the research problem, as it adjusts the 
number of neighbours according to our chosen contiguity criteria. It is likely that the moderating 
effect of common tenure on distress manifested in a variety of ways. Firstly, although our 
theoretical informants suggest heightened resilience effects associated with greater extents of 
common holding, this depends on the flexibility of members to respond to environmental 
feedback. Clearly this was severely hampered in the immediate famine period by extensive 
enclosures, both in response to financial distress amongst landowners, and falling grain prices 
20 
 
which incentivised consolidation, and the clearing of smallholders. Secondly, excess mortality 
during this period was not attributable to direct starvation alone. Communicable diseases, 
particularly cholera, dysentery, and typhus, played the largest role in fatalities (Clarkson and 
Crawford 2001), and it is likely that the high-density settlement associated with rundale, including 
communal living with livestock and multiple generations in a single household, contributed to the 
rapid spread of disease amongst an already immune-compromised population. These factors also 
played a significant role in previous disease outbreaks such as the smallpox epidemic of 1739. 
Examining the distribution of local R2 in both fixed and adaptive specifications (figures 7 and 8) 
shows substantial regional variation in explanatory ability across regions – particularly the north 
and west, although this may be a function of the large bandwidths excluding influential cases.  
 
 
Figure 7. Local R2 (adaptive) 
 
21 
 
 
Figure 8. Local R2 (fixed) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Standardised residuals (adaptive) 
 
 
22 
 
 
Figure 10. Standardised residuals (fixed) 
 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The complexity of these factors and their close interconnectedness confronts a common 
perception surrounding the causes of the Irish famine – and indeed other instances of food 
scarcity. To fully appreciate the impact of famine, we must factor not only its regional impact, but 
the moderating role of resource governance systems in generating this uneven distribution. These 
results map well onto Ostrom’s emphasis on the role of institutional adaptive capacity, and in turn, 
confront several common charges levelled against other meso-level models such as Sen’s 
entitlements model. First, by investigating more fully the structures and institutions which 
characterised the settlements in question, we are better able to account for the complex channels 
through which environmental stressors translated into inequalities of outcome. The preceding 
models verify not only the significance of local modes of governance as predictors of distress rates, 
but their uneven impact across the Island. This question of spatial variance has been largely absent 
from much quantitative work on the impact of famine. Second, in addressing Devereux’s (2001) 
criticism of the methodological individualism of work in famine studies, we might argue that a 
more reasonable approach is to turn to ecological models such as this, to more fully tease out the 
role of contextual effects. Finally, these results demonstrate the need for sociologists to pay greater 
attention to geographical variability in their analyses. Rather than ‘controlling out’ spatial 
heterogeneity through regional fixed effects, or treating them as confounding factors to be adjusted 
through standard errors, instead we should use the descriptive abilities of spatial diagnostics, and 
the analytical capabilities of weighted modelling, to enhance our understanding of the behaviour 
of meso-level social structures and institutions.  
 
 
 
23 
 
References 
 
Aalen, F. H. A., Whelan, K., & Stout, M. (1997). Atlas of the Irish Rural Landscape. Cork: Cork 
University Press. 
 
Almquist, E. L. (1977). Mayo and Beyond: Land, Domestic Industry and Rural Transformation in the Irish 
West. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Boston University. 
 
Anderies, J. M., Janssen, M. A., & Ostrom, E. (2004). A Framework to Analyze the Robustness of 
Social-ecological Systems from an Institutional Perspective. Ecology and Society, 9(1), 18-35. 
 
Anderson, K. (2010). Marx at the Margins: On Nationalism, Ethnicity and Non-western Societies. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
 
Berkes, F., Colding, J., & Folke, C. (Eds.). (2003). Navigating Social-Ecological Systems: Building Resilience 
for Complexity and Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
 
Boyle, P. P., & Ó Gráda, C. (1986). Fertility trends, excess mortality, and the Great Irish Famine. 
Demography, 23(4), 543-562. 
 
Braa, D. M. (1997). The Great Potato Famine and the Transformation of Irish Peasant Society. 
Science and Society, 61(2), 193-215. 
 
Brunsdon, C., & Comber, L. (2015). An Introduction to R for Spatial Analysis and Mapping. London: 
Sage. 
 
Burtchaell, J. (1988). The South Kilkenny Farm Villages. In W. J. Smyth and K. Whelan (Eds.), 
Common Ground, Essays on the Historical Geography of Ireland (pp. 110-123). Cork: Cork University 
Press. 
 
Byrne, D. (1998). Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences. London: Routledge. 
 
Byrne, D. (2005). Complexity, Configurations and Cases. Theory, Culture and Society, 22(1), 95-111. 
 
Byrne, D., & Callaghan, G. (2013). Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences: The State of the Art. 
London: Routledge.  
 
Capra, F. (2005). Complexity and Life. Theory, Culture and Society, 22(1), 33-44. 
 
Census of Ireland. (1841). Report of the Commissioners Appointed to Take the Census of Ireland, for the Year 
1841. 1843 [504] xxiv 
 
Cillers, P. (2001). Boundaries, Hierarchies and Networks in Complex Systems. International Journal 
of Innovation Management, 5(2), 135-147. 
 
Clarkson, L.A., & Crawford, M. E. (2001). Feast and Famine: Food and Nutrition in Ireland 1500-1920. 
Oxford University Press. 
 
Collins, J. F. (2008). Quickening the Earth: Soil Minding and Mending in Ireland. Dublin: UCD Press. 
 
24 
 
Connell, K. H. (1950). Land and Population in Ireland, 1780-1845. The Economic History Review, 2 
(3), 278-289. 
 
Costanza, R., Low, B., Ostrom, E., & Wilson, J. (Eds.). (2001). Institutions, Ecosystems and 
Sustainability. London: Lewis Publishers. 
 
Cumming, G. S., & Collier, J. (2005). Change and Identity in Complex Systems. Ecology and Society, 
10(1), 29-32. 
 
Delaney, E. (2012). The Curse of Reason: The Great Irish Famine. Gill and Macmillan.  
 
Devereux, S. (2001). Sen’s entitlement approach: critiques and counter-critiques. Oxford Development 
Studies, 29(3), 245-263.  
 
Devon Commission. Appendix to minutes of evidence taken before Her Majesty’s Commissioners of Inquiry 
into the state of the law and practice in respect to the occupation of land in Ireland. Part IV. 1845 [672] [673] 
xxii. 
 
Evans, E. E. (1979). Irish Folk Ways. London: Routledge. 
 
Flaherty, E. (2013). Modes of production, metabolism, and resilience: toward a framework for the analysis of 
complex social-ecological systems. (Doctoral Dissertation). Maynooth University. 
 
Flaherty, E. (2014). Assessing the distribution of social-ecological resilience and risk: Ireland as a 
case study of the uneven impact of famine. Ecological Complexity, 19, 35-45. 
 
Fraser, E. (2006). Food system vulnerability: Using past famines to help understand how food 
systems may adapt to climate change. Ecological Complexity, 3(1), 328-335. 
 
FraserD. (2007). Travelling in antique lands: using past famines to develop an 
adaptability/resilience framework to identify food systems vulnerable to climate change. Climatic 
Change, 83, 495-514. 
 
Futemma, C., De Castro, F., Silva-Forsberg, M. C., & Ostrom, E. (2002). The Emergence and 
Outcomes of Collective Action: An Institutional and Ecosystem Approach. Society and Natural 
Resources, 15, 503-522. 
 
Goodchild, M. F. (2004). The Validity and Usefulness of Laws in Geographic Information Science 
and Geography. Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 94(2), 300-303 
 
Goransson, S. (1961). Regular Open-Field Pattern in England and Scandinavian solskifte. 
Geografiska Annaler, 43(1/2), 80-104.  
 
Grimm, V., & Calabrese, J. M. (2011). What is Resilience? A Short Introduction. In G. Deffuant 
and N. Gilbert (Eds.), Viability and Resilience of Complex Systems: Concepts, Methods an