Involuntary Part-Time Employment: A Slow and Uneven Economic Recovery

Involuntary Part-Time Employment 
A Slow and Uneven Economic Recovery
R e b e c c a  G l a u b e r
National Issue Brief #116  Spring 2017
University of
New Hampshire
Carsey School of
Public Policy
CARSEY RESEARCH
The number of involuntary part-time workers, defined as those who would like full time work but for a variety of economic reasons cannot 
find it, rose sharply during the Great Recession and 
reached a peak of over 9 million in 2010.1 Although 
unemployment overall has returned to its pre-recession 
level, involuntary part-time employment is still much 
higher than it was before the recession began, a trend 
that raises questions about the continuing ability of 
the economy to deliver employment security to people 
willing and able to work (see Box 1 on page 2). 
Involuntary part-timers include people like Salwa 
Shabazz, an African American woman who graduated 
from college in 2000 during an economic expansion. 
In an August 2016 opinion piece in the Philadelphia 
Inquirer, Shabazz described her experience with invol-
untary part-time employment: 
I’ve worked on and off since 2008, but finding good 
work has become almost impossible. At one point, 
I was traveling two hours each way to get to my job 
at a state-run liquor store. I eventually had to quit 
when I suffered severe medical issues … A couple 
of years ago, I was able to work again and joined a 
job skills program. The program placed me at a job 
where I work part time—only 20 hours a week— 
as a cashier and food server at a university dining 
hall.…The unemployment rate apparently counts 
people like me as employed, even though I don’t 
work enough hours to pay my bills.2 
Involuntary Part-Time Employment 
Remains Stubbornly High
Figure 1 depicts the percent of women and men 
between the ages of 18 and 64 who spent part of the 
year between 2000 and 2015 working part time invol-
untarily. In 2006, before the recession, the involuntary 
part-time employment rate was 3.6 percent for women 
and 2.4 percent for men. It reached a peak of 8.0 
percent for women in 2009 and a high of 6.4 percent 
for men in 2010. By 2015, when the unemployment 
rate had nearly recovered to its pre-recession level, the 
involuntary part-time employment rate was down only 
to 5.3 percent for women and 4.1 percent for men. 
Though it is down 34 percent since the recession, if 
the involuntary part-time employment rate were to 
continue this pace of decline, it would not return to its 
pre-recession level until 2018, a full nine years after the 
official end of the recession. 
The trends for women and men 
are similar in rural and urban areas 
(see Box 2 for definitions of rural 
and urban). In 2006, before the 
recession, the involuntary part-time 
employment rate was 4.6 percent 
for women who lived in rural parts 
of the country (see Figure 1) and 
3.4 percent for women who lived in 
urban areas. The rate reached a peak 
of 8.7 percent for rural women in 
2009 and a high of 7.9 percent for 
urban women in 2010. By 2015, the 
involuntary part-time unemploy-
ment rate was down to 5.2 percent 
for urban women and 5.9 percent 
for rural women. The rate reached 
a peak of 6.4 percent for rural men 
in 2009 and a high of 6.5 percent for 
urban men in 2010. By 2015, the rate 
had declined to 4.1 percent for urban 
men and 3.8 percent for rural men.
Smaller Declines for  
Black Workers Than for 
White, Hispanic, and 
Asian Workers
Some groups of workers have fared 
better than others. As Figures 2 
and 3 show, since the recession, 
involuntary part-time employ-
ment declined by over 30 percent 
for white, Asian, and Hispanic 
workers but only by 13 percent for 
rural black workers and 19 percent 
for urban black workers. The rate 
declined by 20 percent for rural 
Asian workers compared to over 
36 percent for urban Asian work-
ers. Since most people live in urban 
places, the overall rates illustrated 
in Figures 2 and 3 are similar to the 
rates for urban workers.3 
FIGURE 1. PERCENT OF EMPLOYED WOMEN AND MEN AGE 18–64 WHO SPENT 
PART OF THE YEAR WORKING PART TIME INVOLUNTARILY, 2000–2015
Note: The shaded bars reflect recessions. For simplicity, urban trends are not included in the figure, as they 
track very closely to the trends for all women and all men. Source: Annual Social and Economic Supplement, 
Current Population Survey (2001–2016)
Box 1. Defining Involuntary 
Part-Time Employment
The Current Population Survey 
includes two questions pertinent 
to this brief: (1) “Do you normally 
work a full-time or part-time 
schedule?” and (2) “What is the 
reason for your part-time employ-
ment?” From these two ques-
tions and following the Bureau 
of Labor Statistics, this brief 
defines an involuntary part-time 
worker as someone who normally 
works fewer than 35 hours per 
week because of poor economic 
conditions or an inability to find 
full-time work. This is contrasted 
with full-time workers, those who 
work part time by choice (volun-
tary part-time workers), and those 
who work part-time for other 
unspecified reasons.
Box 2. Defining Rural and Urban
Definitions of rural and urban 
vary among researchers and the 
sources of data they use. Data for 
this brief come from the Current 
Population Survey, which indi-
cates if each household is located 
in a metropolitan area. The Office 
of Management and Budget 
defines a metropolitan area as: 
(1) a central county (or counties) 
containing at least one urbanized 
area with a population of at least 
50,000 people, and (2) the coun-
ties that are socially and economi-
cally integrated with the urbanized 
area, as measured by commuting 
patterns. In this brief, urban refers 
to such metropolitan places, and 
rural refers to nonmetropolitan 
places outside these boundaries.
  2  C A R S E Y  S C H O O L  O F  P U B L I C  P O L I C Y
Other studies echo these results and 
point to racial disparities in the eco-
nomic recovery. The unemployment 
rate for whites, for example, is at or 
below its pre-recession level in twenty 
U.S. states, but the level of unemploy-
ment for African Americans is at or 
below its pre-recession level in only 
nine states.4 Moreover, five of these 
Workers Without a High 
School Degree Are Much 
More Likely to Experience 
Involuntary Part-Time Work
Educational disparities in involuntary 
part-time employment have persisted 
in the post-recession period in rural 
and urban areas. As Figure 4 shows, 
before the recession just 5.9 percent 
of those without a high school degree 
worked part time involuntarily. The 
figure peaked at 14.6 percent during 
the recession. Although those without a 
high school degree have fared relatively 
well during the economic recovery, they 
are still close to five times more likely to 
work part time involuntarily than those 
with a college degree.
nine states have unemployment 
rates that are among the highest in 
the nation.5 These racial disparities 
may correlate with racial residential 
segregation, as a recent study shows 
that unemployed African Americans 
are 60 percent more likely than other 
racial groups to live in areas with 
double-digit unemployment rates.6 
FIGURE 2. PERCENT OF EMPLOYED WOMEN AND MEN AGE 18–64 WHO SPENT 
PART OF THE YEAR WORKING PART TIME INVOLUNTARILY, BY RACE-ETHNICITY, 
BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTER THE GREAT RECESSION
Source: Annual Social and Economic Supplement, Current Population Survey (2001–2016)
FIGURE 3. PERCENT CHANGE IN INVOLUNTARY PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT 
BETWEEN THE RECESSION (2009–2010) AND POST-RECESSION (2014–2015), 
BY RACE-ETHNICITY
Source: Annual Social and Economic Supplement, Current Population Survey (2001–2016)
Although those without a high 
school degree have fared rela-
tively well during the economic 
recovery, they are still close to 
five times more likely to work 
part time involuntarily than 
those with a college degree.
                                                                                                                                                         C A R S E Y  S C H O O L  O F  P U B L I C  P O L I C Y      3
More Than One in Five 
Involuntary Part-Time 
Workers Live in Poverty, 
Compared to One in 
Twenty-Five Full-Time 
Workers
Involuntary part-time employ-
ment remains strongly correlated 
with poverty. As Figure 5 shows, 
in the pre- and post-recessionary 
periods over 20 percent of involun-
tary part-time workers, compared 
to about 4 percent of all full-time 
workers, lived below the federal 
poverty line. Thus today, involun-
tary part-time workers are more 
than five times as likely to live in 
poverty than are full-time workers. 
Figure 6 shows that the poverty 
rate is slightly higher for involun-
tary part-time workers residing in 
rural areas than in urban areas. 
Involuntary Part-Time 
Workers Earn 19 Percent 
Less Than Full-Time 
Workers in Similar Jobs
Involuntary part-time workers earn 
19 percent less per hour than those 
who work in similar jobs and have 
similar credentials.7 Women expe-
rience a 14 percent wage penalty 
for involuntary part-time employ-
ment, men 21 percent. These wage 
penalties are net of differences in 
workers’ occupations, industries, 
regional and metropolitan areas of 
residence, educational attainment, 
and age, meaning that, among men 
and women who are similar in all of 
these respects, the ones who work 
part time involuntarily will make 19 
FIGURE 4. PERCENT OF EMPLOYED WOMEN AND MEN AGE 18-64 WHO SPENT 
PART OF THE YEAR WORKING PART TIME INVOLUNTARILY, BY EDUCATION, 
BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTER THE GREAT RECESSION
Source: Annual Social and Economic Supplement, Current Population Survey (2001–2016)
FIGURE 5. PERCENT OF EMPLOYED WOMEN AND MEN AGE 18-64 WHO LIVED 
BELOW THE POVERTY LINE, BY WORK STATUS, BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTER 
THE GREAT RECESSION
Source: Annual Social and Economic Supplement, Current Population Survey (2001–2016)
  4  C A R S E Y  S C H O O L  O F  P U B L I C  P O L I C Y
percent less per hour than the ones 
who work full time. The wage pen-
alties remained relatively constant 
during the pre-recession, recession, 
and post-recession periods.
Summary
Although involuntary part-time 
employment declined by nearly 34 
percent since the recent recession, it 
is still, unlike unemployment overall, 
higher than before the recession, and 
racial and educational disparities in 
involuntary part-time employment 
persist. Since the recession, involun-
tary part-time employment declined 
by over 30 percent for white, Asian, 
and Hispanic workers but by less 
than 20 percent for black workers. 
Among workers without a high 
school degree, 9 percent are work-
ing part-time involuntarily after the 
recession, compared to just 2 percent 
FIGURE 6. PERCENT OF EMPLOYED WOMEN AND MEN AGE 18-64 WHO 
WORKED IN INVOLUNTARY PART-TIME POSITIONS AND LIVED BELOW THE 
POVERTY LINE, BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTER THE GREAT RECESSION
Source: Annual Social and Economic Supplement, Current Population Survey (2001–2016)
of college graduates. Involuntary 
part-time workers are more than five 
times as likely as full-time workers 
to live in poverty, and they earn 19 
percent less per hour than full-time 
workers in similar jobs.
Some have asked whether this 
level of involuntary part-time 
employment is the new normal.8 
Recent research suggests that the 
increase has been greatest in indus-
tries and occupations most affected 
by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), 
namely, in sectors with many previ-
ously uninsured workers.9 Other 
studies paint a more complicated 
picture by exploring movement 
into involuntary part-time posi-
tions from above and below—from 
full time down to involuntary part 
time, and from unemployment up 
to involuntary part time. During 
the recession, a significant share of 
involuntary part-time employment 
was attributable to the loss of work 
hours (that is, workers moving from 
a full-time schedule to a part-time 
schedule). In the post-recession, the 
largest share of involuntary part-
time employment is attributable 
to the gain in work hours (that is, 
workers moving from unemploy-
ment to involuntary part-time 
employment).10 Perhaps today, 
involuntary part-time employment 
is a quick stop on the path toward 
full-time work. Or perhaps not. 
Another recent study shows that 
the percentage of those working 
part-time involuntarily because 
their employers cut their hours has 
returned to its pre-recession level, 
whereas the proportion of those 
working part time involuntarily 
because they cannot find full-time 
jobs has remained elevated.11 As the 
economy continues to recover, we 
need to explore the complexities of 
involuntary part-time employment 
and disparities in the recovery.
Data
This brief updates and extends past 
work on involuntary part-time 
employment. The analysis draws on 
data from the Current Population 
Survey (CPS), which is a monthly 
household survey conducted by 
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
and the U.S. Census Bureau. The 
survey was initially designed in the 
1940s to measure unemployment. 
Since then, it has been fielded every 
month to a sample of about 50,000 
households. The CPS asks about 
part-time employment for the week 
before the survey and for the previ-
ous calendar year. Numerous studies 
have used both measures of part-
time employment, and they tend to 
                                                                                                                                                         C A R S E Y  S C H O O L  O F  P U B L I C  P O L I C Y      5
 The Carsey School of Public Policy at the University of New Hampshire is nationally recognized for its research, policy education, and 
engagement. The school takes on the pressing issues of the twenty-first century, striving for innovative, responsive, and equitable solutions.
Huddleston Hall • 73 Main Street • Durham, NH 03824
(603) 862-2821
TTY Users: dial 7-1-1 or 1-800-735-2964 (Relay N.H.)
carsey.unh.edu
University of New Hampshire
Carsey School of Public Policy
show similar results. This brief uses 
measures from the preceding calen-
dar year. Unless otherwise noted, all 
differences are statistically signifi-
cant (p<0.05). All data are weighted 
to account for the complex survey 
design. Industry is measured with 
13 broad categories, and occupation 
is measured with 26 categories. All 
analyses exclude individuals living 
in group quarters and those under 
age 18 or over age 64.
E n d n o t e s
1. See U.S. Census Bureau, “Labor Force 
Statistics for the Current Population 
Survey,” http://data.bls.gov/timeseries/
LNS12032194.
2. Salwa Shabazz, “Commentary: 
I Need the Economy to Give Me a 
Fair Chance,” Philly.com, August 18, 
2016, http://www.philly.com/philly/
opinion/commentary/20160819_
Commentary__I_need_the_economy_
to_give_me_a_fair_chance.html.
3. The declines by race-ethnicity and 
by urban and rural are as follows: 30 
percent for rural whites and 32 percent 
for urban whites; 20 percent for rural 
Asians and 36 percent for urban Asians; 
51 percent for rural Hispanics and 36 
percent for urban Hispanics; 13 percent 
for rural blacks and 19 percent for 
urban blacks.
4. Valerie Wilson, “State Unemployment 
Rates by Race and Ethnicity at the End 
of 2015 Show a Plodding Recovery” 
(Washington DC: Economic Policy 
Institute, 2016), http://www.epi.org/
publication/state-unemployment-rates-
by-race-and-ethnicity-at-the-end-of-
2015-show-a-plodding-recovery/.
5. Ibid.
6. U.S. Department of Labor (DOL), 
“The African American Labor Force in 
the Recovery” (Washington DC: DOL, 
2012), https://www.dol.gov/_sec/media/
reports/blacklaborforce/.
7. Many other studies have shown that 
part-time jobs pay less than full-time 
jobs; for example, see Barry T. Hirsch, 
“Why Do Part-Time Workers Earn 
Less? The Role of Worker and Job Skill,” 
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 
vol. 58 (2005): 525–51.
8. Rob Valletta and Catherine van der 
List, “Involuntary Part-Time Work: 
Here to Stay?” Economic Letters, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 2015; 
Patrick Gillespie, “America’s Part-Time 
Workforce Is Huge,” CNN Money, 
April 25, 2016, http://money.cnn.
com/2016/04/25/news/economy/part-
time-jobs/.
9. William E. Even and David A. 
Macpherson, “The Affordable Care Act 
and the Growth of Involuntary Part-
Time Employment,” IZA Discussion 
Papers No. 9324 (Bonn, Germany: 
Institute for the Study of Labor, 2015).
10. Tomaz Cajner et al., “Why Is 
Involuntary Part-Time Work Elevated?” 
FEDS Notes, April 14, 2014.
11. Robert G. Valetta, Leila Bengali, and 
Catherine van der List, “Cyclical and 
Market Determinants of Involuntary 
Part-Time Employment” IZA 
Discussion Papers No. 9738 (Bonn, 
Germany: Institute for the Study of 
Labor, 2016).
A b o u t  t h e  A u t h o r
Rebecca Glauber is an associate pro-
fessor of sociology and a faculty fellow 
at the Carsey School of Public Policy 
at the University of New Hampshire 
(rebecca.glauber@unh.edu).
A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
The author thanks Michele Dillon, 
Michael Ettlinger, Curt Grimm, 
Beth Mattingly, and Amy Sterndale 
of the Carsey School of Public 
Policy for comments and sugges-
tions; Patrick Watson for edito-
rial assistance; and Laurel Lloyd 
and Bianca Nicolosi at the Carsey 
School for layout assistance.
  6  C A R S E Y  S C H O O L  O F  P U B L I C  P O L I C Y
